A Beautiful Lotus Garland

In Praise of the Omniscient Lord of Dharma Butön Rinchen Drup

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti!Lord of Dharma, regent of the mighty Lord of Sages,Rinchen Drup, guru to beings of
the three worlds,Second Omniscient One for this age of strife,Butön Lotsāwa, at your feet
I bow my head in homage.

In the past, as a merchant you offered a jewelTo the tathāgata Limitless Light;Then, similarly
as the son of the Dharma-king Puṇyapuṣpa,You served the sugata Vīryakoṭi—to you I bow.


As a supreme friend of the Sage’s teachings in KashmirAnd as Śākyaśrībhadra and others—To you
who manifested in a succession of birthsAs scholars and as adepts in India and Tibet, I
bow.

When you were born as a son to Rigdzin DraktönAnd your sublime mother Sonam Bum,In her dreams
she generated maṇḍala circlesAnd experienced untold bliss, clarity and samādhi.

On the ninth day of the waning phase of the Citrā month in the Iron Tiger,You blissfully took
birth and, in her dreams, your motherEmanated and reabsorbed hosts of yidam deities,And
auspicious signs appeared throughout the land—to you I bow.

At a young age you read the Wisdom of the Hour of DeathAnd the Sūtra of the Ten Wheels of Kṣitigarbha,Mastering
reading without tuition and perfecting qualities of learning—To you in
whom the supreme potential fully awakened, I bow.

At the age of seven you requested the generation of bodhicittaBefore the great being Trophuwa,[1]
and in your mindThe attitude of cherishing others above yourself took root.To you who
loved all sentient beings maternally, I bow.

From your grandfather, you received empowerment, explanations of tantras,And pith instructions
from the vehicles of the Ancient Translations.By meditating on generation and perfection,
you saw the face of the yidam deity,And actualized the signs of accomplishment—to you I
bow.

Before the disciplined and learned Rinchen SengéAnd Khenchen Drakpa Shönnu Palzang[2]You were
fully ordained as a monk and thereafterRemained unsullied by disciplinary faults—to you,
diligent observer of vows, I bow.

By following Tarpa Lotsāwa,[3] Pakpa Ö,[4]Palden Sengé and hosts of other learned and accomplished
masters,You traversed an ocean of instruction in the outer and inner sciences,And in
sūtra and mantra—to you I bow.

You reputation for scholarship spread throughout the land,By expounding scripture and reasoning
you defeated opponents,And you, like a valiant Mañjuśrī, victorious over all,Were praised
as a great orator, Butön Khaché—to you I bow.

During empowerment, you saw the guru as the Vajra Continuum.[5]You accomplished the supreme
six-branch yogaAnd realized the primordial nature of clear light beyond concepts—To you who
perfected the great strength of wisdom born of meditation, I bow.

When studying Guhyasamāja, you saw the buddhas and bodhisattvasPerforming various feats of samādhi.To
you who attained limitless doors of samādhi,Such as the Purification of Realms and
Heroic Progress, I bow.

You directly encountered the deities of the outer and inner maṇḍalas,And you reached the pinnacle
of pure vision related to the five stages.To you, whose realization was one with the
experienceOf vajra ḍākinīs, vīras and vīriṇīs, I bow.

The haughty spirits worshipped you at their crowns,You took your seat on the scholar’s dharma-throne
in Shalu’s golden temple,And from there expounded sūtra and mantra and infinite instructionsThat
matured and liberated the fortunate—to you I pray.

In commenting on the intent of the Words and Treatises,You possessed the sublime wisdom of seeing
precisely,And, as inspired by the guru and the supreme deities,Produced great stores
of excellent compositions—to you I bow.

In the great dharma palace of Ribuk,You meditated on the two profound stages,And through ripening
and liberating, expounding and composing,Ensured the longevity of the Sage’s teachings—to
you I bow.

Guru Padma appeared to you directlyAnd granted you profound instruction, and you saw the smiling
facesOf buddhas and bodhisattvas and gurus and yidam deities.To you, the mighty commander
of dharmapālas, I bow.

Vinaya, Sūtra, Middle Way, Perfection of Wisdom, Secret Mantra—Supreme spiritual guide to the
Sage’s teachings in their entirety,Crown jewel among all learned scholars and accomplished
adepts,Great all-knowing lion of speech, to you I bow.

With the three pure criteria you distinguished Dharma from non-dharma,You translated the teachings
of sūtra and mantra, edited earlier translations,Restored omissions, resolved apparent
contradictions and so on,Rectifying the Dharma of the Buddha’s Word and the Treatises—Great
lotsāwa, eyes of the world, to you I bow.

Immaculate in discipline, your physical form was resplendent;With limitless samādhi, you knew
the minds of others;Brilliant as the sun in your intelligent discernment of phenomena—To
you who attained the wisdom of a great ārya, I bow.

You bound fast the motion of duality within the avadhūti,And perfected the essence of unwavering,
immutable great bliss—To you, the Vajra Holder, I bow.

To you who produced a beautiful garland of sun, moon and stars,Such learned and accomplished
ones as Lachen Sogyal,[6]Chökyi Gyaltsen, and you heart-son the great lotsāwa,As well as
such students as Drakpa Gyaltsen,[7] Tai Situ[8] and others—to you I bow.

You who mastered the great scriptures of Yogatantra,Great charioteer of an infinite ocean of
tantric teachings,Especially Guhyasamāja, CakrasaṃvaraAnd Kālacakra, to you I bow.

In short, it seems as if you spent your entire life on each of the elementsOf study, contemplation
and meditation, exposition, debate and composition.To you, whose life of liberation,
that of a great tenth-level ārya,Is difficult for an ordinary person to comprehend, I bow.


Even now, the fact that the teachings of the vajra vehicleHave not declined but remain as a
maturing and liberating streamIs due to your kindness, O glorious and mighty Vajradhara.To
you whose enlightened activity is without limit, I bow.

You constructed a wondrous and miraculous arrayOf infinite maṇḍalas of the Sugatas’ threefold
support,[9]And inspired the two accumulations through practice and offering.To you who demonstrated
inconceivably vast intent, I bow.

At the age of five and seventy years,On the second 'joy' of the waning phaseOf the Pūrvāsāḍha
month, in the second half of the night,You temporarily withdrew the maṇḍala of your emanated
form,And travelled to the Dharma assembly in Sukhāvatī—to you I bow.

At that time, there were marvellous, miraculous signs,And a mass of boundless offerings, human
and divine.To you, who produced a multitude of precious relicsTo bring immense, unending
benefit to others, I bow.

When you awaken as the Seventh of this Fortunate Aeon,May I be reborn as a suitable recipient
when you turnThe Wheel of Dharma, may I see your enlightened face,And may I receive from
you my prophetic declaration.

All the virtue that I and others gather throughout the three timesI dedicate to the fulfilment
of the Dharma Lord Mañjughoṣa’s intentions.May all beings in their infinity, without a
single exception,Come to attain the supreme jewel that is omniscience.

May the sūtra and mantra teachings never wane but flourish and spread;May the evil hordes of
Māra be entirely and thoroughly vanquished;May the divine city of the Sage’s teachings reign
victorious over all;And may perfect and stable excellence and magnificence abound.

I, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, offered this tribute to Butön Rinpoche, the second Lord of Sages for
this age of strife, as a prayer made out of unshakeable faith and devotion on the auspicious
first day of the month of the Aśvinī (i.e., ninth) month of the Iron Snake year.[10]
Siddhirastu. May it be virtuous!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.