A Short Guide to Yangleshö in Nepal

by Jamyang Khyentsé Chökyi Lodrö

Homage to the Glorious Heruka!

Through the magic of birth from the unborn,From the great, self-existing secret,These vajra
words naturally arise:How wondrous and supreme, emaho!

I, Padmākara, was born spontaneouslyOn the northwest border of Uḍḍiyāna,On the tip of a lotus
in the sindura ocean,Untainted by a womb.

Adopted as a son of Uḍḍiyāna’s king,I benefited beings through my yogic activity,And maintained
this conduct in the eight great charnel grounds.Under many accomplished masters and paṇḍitasI
studied and learned, gaining knowledgeIn the host of teachings of sūtra and tantra.


At Māratika, through the path of swiftness, The vidyādhara level of immortality was accomplished,And
Amitāyus displayed his very countenance.

In particular, in rocky Yangleshö,I manifested the glorious Great Seal.Obstacles and obstructors,
all were conquered Through the meditative power of vajra wrath.The vidyādhara level
of mahāmudrā then completed,I entered the ranks of Vajradhara.

This site of such accomplishmentCarries the blessing of the great Heruka.When Rudra was liberated
long ago,This is where appeared his boundless inner palace.The ground is laid out auspiciously,
with all that is desirable.

Multitudes of bodhisattvas —Lord of Mysteries,[1] Mañjuśrī, and countless others —Actually came
in person to this holy site,Surrounded on every side by the eight great charnel grounds.

Specifically, when the Great Sage himselfMiraculously set foot on the land at Ox Hill,[2]The
community of bodhisattvas and arhats Travelled here,[3] accompanied by all their retinue,And
a host of immortal ṛṣis and vidyādharas,And gods and nāgas and yakṣas too.For these he
turned the Dharma wheel, vast and profound.And for the ears of the exceptional vidyādharasHe
proclaimed the melodious sound of the tantras,Truly the well-spring of the great herukas,Hiding
countless treasures of secret mantra.

Siddhas such as Saraha, from the noble land of India,Came here and practiced and relied upon
this place,Until they received the siddhi of supreme accomplishment.Therefore, those who
wishThe secret mantra to flourish —Their worship and practice here will indeed be meaningful;They
will gain the great good fortune of perfect accomplishment,And teachings and beings
will thrive in abundance!

Samaya!

In this supreme location, in the centre of Nepal,Birthplace of buddhas of past, present and
future,Greatest of stūpas, of blessings and relics,Delight of glorious Maheśvara,In this naturally
arisen secret cave,Awesome gathering place of herukas,Vajravārāhī abides in actuality,And
ḍākas and ḍākinīs delight and play.

Wondrous pleasure grove, where great bliss is attained —Merely by seeing it, karmic obscurations
are purified;Merely by hearing, the doors to the lower realms are closed.If one practices
correctly, the supreme siddhi is gained.

If those who hold the samayasPerform the outer, inner and secret gaṇacakras,They will become
the equal of the herukas.If those who have mastered vajra-like yogic conductPerform the great
secret dance,Their channels, inner air and bindus will be purified,The strength of the
wisdom of awareness will blaze,They will gain success on the path of union and liberation,And
certainty, too, in the great secret of secrets —The ultimate realization of reality.

Samaya!

When Tibet has fallen into suffering,And the power of the Mongol-Turks has grown,And all types
of miseries arise,Then, my, Padmākara’s, concernAnd the aspirations of the Great King,Will
flash upon this place like a bolt of lightningAnd cause the teachings and beings' happiness
to thrive.

While not an actual terma-treasure,This guide will manifest in the future.The Dharma King of
Nepal,One who is named Bhaṃga,Will take hold of this profound treasure,And open the way to
prosperity for the teachings and beings.

Samaya!

The dancing monkey rides the bird,He will fall to the ground and wander like a dog,Run like
a pig, then hide like a mouse.Then the tip of the ox-hornWill be adorned with multi-coloured
flags,And for a brief time this world will be happy.Then the terma-treasure of this place
will manifest.

In the fire-monkey year,[4] I Pema Yeshé Dorjé went on pilgrimage to India and Nepal for the
benefit and happiness of the teachings and beings. On the 1st day of the 12th month, while
offering a gaṇacakra feast of Yang Phur Drakma [5] in Yangleshö my mind became totally clear.
In the very early morning, on the 2nd day, my student, the Lama from Nangchen Tsechu,[6]
the master of ceremony Lodrö Chokden, gave me a piece of paper and urged me, saying:
“Write whatever you remember.” Due to this circumstance, I began writing this guide at Yangleshö.
Later, when we reached Svayambhū I continued to write. I wrote down all that I could
recall of the many different meditative experiences that occurred. Maṅgalam!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2017. (Translated by Peter Woods, Han Kop and Stefan Mang. Edited
by Libby Hogg.)