A Song of Innermost Praise to Vajrasattva
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ vajrasatva aha vajra gīrti ahoye!

palden künkhyab rangjung sangwa ché
Glorious, omnipresent, self-arisen great secret,
kyilkhor gyatso tro dang duwé dak
Masterfully emanating and reabsorbing oceanic maṇḍalas,
dorjé sempa mishik dechen po
Vajra-like being of indestructible great bliss,
gyurmé dorjé sempar töpar gyi
Unchanging Vajrasattva, to you I offer praise!

om yik ngaden yeshe sangwé dzö
Oṃ—fivefold syllable, secret treasury of wisdom,
gyüdé gyatsö ngak kyi jungné ché
Vast source of mantras throughout the oceanic tantras,
gyutrul mizé dorjé na dé lu
Inexhaustible illusion, the song of the vajra nāda,
dü sum dümé küntu nang la tö
Atemporal, not of the three times, to you I offer praise!

benza miché dorjé rangshyin du
Vajra—in the indestructible, vajra-like nature,
khor dang nya ngen depa chik tu dum
Saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are contained as one,
shyi gyü kadak ösal nyukmé ku
Natural kāya of ground tantra, primordially pure clear light,
tenyo künkhyab dangpö sangye tö
Original buddha pervading environment and beings—to you I offer praise!

sa ta sempa chenpo lam gyi den
Sattva—great being, who has reached the sublime peace
gok den shyiwa dampé tarchin ching
That is the culmination of the true path and true cessation,
lungtok dampé chö kyi rolmo trol
And who sounds the Dharma of transmission and realization
shyingkham küntu yongsu khyab la tö
As music throughout every realm—to you I offer praise!

duljé semchen shying dul drang jinyé
For beings to be trained, as numerous as atoms in the universe,
lam gyü khorlö drib sum drawa chö
You cut the web of threefold obscuration with the wheel of path tantra.
yeshe nangwa rabtu gyepa yi
Great radiance who banishes the darkness of ignorance
marik münsel ö chenpo la tö
In wisdom's expansive light, to you I offer praise!

a dön kyemé tongpé chotrul lé
From the magical display of unborn emptiness, the true meaning of A,
dré gyü gyutrul drawé kyilkhor dzok
The fruitional tantra, the maṇḍala of the Illusory Net, is complete.
ku shyi trin chen nampar köpa ni
To you who make the vast, cloud-like array of the four kāyas
namkhé talé khyabpar dzé la tö
Extend unto the very limits of the universe, I offer praise!

detar ngedön töpé drayang di
Through the virtue of proclaiming this melodious song
chok nam küntu nampar drokpé gé
Of definitive praise everywhere and in all directions,
dro nam gyü sum khorlo korwa yi
May beings attain the three secrets of Vajrasattva,
dorjé sempé sang sum drubpar shok
The one who turns the wheels of threefold tantra!

Thus, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö wrote down whatever arose in his mind during a ceremony to mark the
first week since the passing of Princess Sangde, in Sikkim in the month of Vaiśākha in
the Fire Bird year. May this be a cause for the city of the three realms of existence to be
emptied!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2019.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rdo rje sems dpa' la yang snying gi bstod pa/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 2: 469–470