Cloud Banks of Blessings

Praise and Prayer to the Vajradhara Ngawang Lekpa

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Homage to the guru and protector Mañjughoṣa!

I bow down in devotion and prostrate myself at the feetOf the reverend guru who confers the
light of intelligence,The sun-like enlightened form of the wisdom knowledgeOf victors and
their heirs throughout the whole of space and time.

The jewelled mountain of your pure three trainings,Embraced by a hundred thousand newly risen
suns of wisdom and loveAnd blazing resplendently with activity throughout the three worlds,Overcomes
the darkness of Māra’s hordes—to you I devotedly pay homage.

With matchless intelligence derived from prior training,You clearly and distinctly realized
all that could be known,Mastered the vast activity of the victorious one’s heirsAnd constantly
strove for others’ benefit—to you I devotedly pay homage.

Cared for by sublime ones, you received the blessings of their three secrets,Reached the pinnacle
of listening, contemplation and meditation,And gained powerful siddhis for subjugation
and guidance—Mighty lord of vajra holders, to you I devotedly pay homage.

Paṇḍita and dharma sovereign, you held in your powerThe sovereign methods of sūtras, tantras
and pith instructions,Master of Dharma inseparable from the guru Mañjughoṣa,Lord of speech,
to you I devotedly pay homage.

You delighted in the ocean of profound whispered transmissions,And bestowed the jewel of virtue,
excellence and liberation,The treasure of spoken instructions that is the essence of
Virūpa’s wisdom,Lord among those with the assurance of learning and realization, to you I
pay homage.

You raised aloft the pristine white parasol of the study and practiceOf the Buddha’s teachings,
source of all benefit and joy, at the summit of existence,And your renown extended everywhere,
even into the hearts of mountains,Lord of a million holders of the teachings, to
you I devotedly pay homage.

To you who never wavered from the wisdom of co-emergent blissAnd clear light or from the view
of the equality of saṃsāra and nirvāṇaBeyond the elaborations of what is real and what is
unreal,I devotedly pay homage.

In the spacious mansion of the three scriptural collectionsLies the highest wealth, the seven
riches of the noble ones,And even the haughtiest bow down before you—Lion of speech, to
you I devotedly pay homage.

The lofty victory banner of discipline’s finest fabricWas decorated with the silken tassels
of the three ways of the learned,And as knots in the channels loosened and prāṇa-mind entered
the central channel,Adorned with the crest of accomplishment—to you I devotedly pay homage.


For you, until saṃsāra itself is emptied, I pray:May your wisdom be steeped in the nectar of
untainted great bliss,May your speech resound as the indestructible vajra roar,And may your
form endure as the Immortal Protector.

As I reflect on your life of liberationAnd pray to you from the depths of my heartWith ardent
and unceasing devotion, look upon me with love,And confer the four empowerments into the
four maṇḍalas, I pray.

Through the power of my striving in the four empowerments during the four sessions of the Time
of the Path, [1]May I purify the four obscurations, effect the fourfold absorption,Actualize
the four kāyas and five primordial wisdoms,And accomplish the benefit of all beings
who are as infinite in number as space is vast!

Throughout all my lives until I reach this goal,May I find the freedoms and advantages, develop
renunciation,Follow an excellent teacher, encounter the sacred Dharma,And garb myself
in the cloth of pure ethical discipline!

May I never be without utterly pure bodhicitta,May the genuine view arise within my mind,May
I be matured through empowerment and maintain pure samaya,And may I never be separated from
the glorious guru’s wisdom mind!

May I be guided and cared for by the guru in all my lives to come,May all that obstructs the
practice of the sacred Dharma be pacified,May fortunate conducive circumstances expand like
a river in summer,And may all be auspicious for the spontaneous accomplishment of twofold
benefit!

This prayer was made by Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, who aims to continue the Mañjughoṣa guru’s activity
and was sustained by the nectar-like speech of this object of praise, in response to
a request made together with the offering of a divine skilen scarf from Yeshe Nyima and Ngawang
Rinchen, who both possess deep faith and admiration for the Vajradhara guru. May this
be a cause for the swift infusion of blessings from this noble guru and dharma sovereign
in a wisdom vision. Sarvadā kalyāṇaṃ bhavatu!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.