Cutting through the Four Demons in Absolute Space
In Praise of Machik Labdrön
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo jñānapāramitāyai!
dü sum gyalwa tamché kyepé yum
Mother who bears all the victorious ones of the three times,
sherab parol chin ma zuk kyi kur
Manifesting in the rūpakāya form of the Perfection of Wisdom,
ten né drowa kün gyi dön dzé ma
She who acts for the sake of all living beings—
ama lab kyi drönmar chaktsal lo
Ama Labkyi Drönma, to you I pay homage!

jangchok khawachen gyi gyalkham dir
In this northern country of the Land of Snows,
zukchen mi dang zukmé lha dré tul
You tamed embodied humans and immaterial gods and demons,
yumchen tuk lé trulpé dro drolma
Saviouress who emanated from the Great Mother’s heart—
sa chü wangchuk chenmo khyö la tö
Magnificent master of the tenth bhūmi, to you I offer praise!

shyönnü dü né rik kyi nyugu gyé
From an early age, the shoots of your enlightened potential blossomed;
yongdzin dampa mangpö shyab la tü
You bowed down at the feet of many excellent tutors,
zabgyé chö kyi damngak gyatsö ter
And became an ocean-like treasury of profound and vast Dharma instruction—
jetsün pakma chenmo khyö la tö
Great reverend and exalted lady, to you I offer praise!

sherab parol chin yum gongpé dön
The fundamental intent of the mother Prajñāpāramitā
rang gi rigpé ngönsum tokpa dang
You realized directly through your own awareness,
do ngak zungjuk zab dön dü chö kyi
And in a hundred ways you opened the great wisdom-mind treasury
tuk ter chenpö go gya jé la tö
Of cutting through demons, the profound union of sūtra and mantra—to you I offer praise!

trulpé ku chok dampa sangye kyi
The supreme nirmāṇakāya Padampa Sangye
tokpé bokdön gyalkham chokmé drim
Enhanced his realization while wandering aimlessly through various lands
ronyom tulshyuk chöpa tarchin né
And reached the pinnacle of the yogic conduct of equal taste—
sipa sum lé nampar gyal la tö
To you who are fully victorious over the three worlds, I offer praise!

khyö ni sangye kün gyi trulpa té
You who are the emanation of all the buddhas,
rigdzin drubtob nam dang gongpa chik
Your realization one with accomplished vidyādharas,
yingchuk dorjé pakmö namtrul té
Manifestation of Vajravārāhī, sovereign of space,
naljor wangchuk drubpé gyalmor tö
Supreme yoginī, queen of siddhas—to you I offer praise!

tongpar né dang semchen yong mi tong
You remain in emptiness while not forsaking sentient beings,
mé shyin jé dang deshek jingyi lob
Your actions accord with your speech, and you convey the sugatas’ blessings,
nam shyi gongdön zabmo dü chö kyi
Great founder of the instruction lineage of Cutting through demons,
kabab shingta chenpo khyö la tö
With its profound fourfold intent—to you I offer praise!

gyuma tabü ting ngé dzin chok dang
The supreme illusion-like samādhi,
pawar dro dang dorjé tabu yi
As well as the heroic-march and vajra-like—
tingdzin sam mi khyab la nyomjuk dang
You mastered the equipoise of inconceivable concentrations,
yeshe daki tso chok chenmor tö
Sublime leader of wisdom ḍākinīs, to you I offer praise!

tongpanyi dang tsenma mepa dang
Emptiness, the absence of characteristic marks,
mönpa mepa namtar go sum gyi
And wishlessness—these three gateways to liberation
chöying zakmé yeshe ngawang jor
You mastered with the inexhaustible wisdom of the dharmadhātu—
jetsün chomden dema khyö la tö
To you, reverend bhagavatī, I offer praise!

tokché tokmé gadrö nyemjé dang
The substantial, insubstantial, elation and egotistical pride,1
pungpo nyönmong chidak lhabü dü
The aggregates, afflictions, lord of death and devaputra—2
ying su chom né deshyin nyi du shek
Having conquered these māras in absolute space, you arrived at suchness—
yangdak pang tok tarchin ma la tö
To you who perfected authentic abandonment and realization, I offer praise!

ma chik drinmo ché yi damngak ni
The instruction of the One Mother, who is so very kind,
né tok metsé nyönmong tsené jin
Is like treatment directed at the vital points: it eradicates afflictions,
dakdzin drung chung yeshe ngönsum tön
Uproots ego-clinging and reveals primordial wisdom directly—
dro drol nyurma pamo khyö la tö
To you, the heroine who swiftly liberates beings, I offer praise!

ta gyé trödral chönyi namkha tar
The dharmatā nature is sky-like, beyond complexity and the eight extremes,
tsen tsön jöpa lé dé nammé ying
It is a featureless expanse beyond labelling and expression,
nam ché tamal bümé zuk gyur yang
Yet transformed into this physical expression of feminine appearance—
ngowo tadral uma chenpor tö
To you, whose essence is the great middle way beyond extremes, I offer praise!

riktong ösal tabshé yermé pa
Awareness and emptiness, the luminosity of inseparable method and wisdom—
po chak gyur dé chö lé rab dé shing
You transcended the phenomena of transient, passion-based bliss,
zungdzin küntu tokpé dribpa pang
And abandoned obscurations that derive from dualistic conception—
ösal chakgya chenpor drub la tö
To you who are established in clear light Mahāmudrā, I offer praise!

khordé chö kün kané dakpé ying
In the space of the primordial purity of all phenomena in saṃsāra and nirvāṇa
rangjung lhüngyi drubpé dang sharwé
Emerges the radiance that is self-arising and spontaneously present;
yeshe düma jepé tsemor shek
Through this, you reached the pinnacle of wisdom that is unconditioned—
shyir dzok rigpa kur min khyö la tö
To you, originally perfect awareness matured in physical form, I offer praise!

lhenkyé yeshe dorjé naljorma
Vajrayoginī of co-emergent wisdom—
detong dorjé tsünmö kha long né
From the vajra queen’s sky-like expanse of bliss-emptiness,
gyalwa sé ché tro dang dü dzé ma
You emanate and reabsorb the victorious buddhas and their heirs—
kyilkhor gyatsö dakmo khyö la tö
To you, the sovereign of infinite, ocean-like maṇḍalas, I offer praise!

detar tö ching solwa tabpé tü
Through the power of praising and praying to you in this way,
dakchak changchub drubpa barchöpé
May all that prevents our attainment of awakening—
chi nang sangwé dra sum ying su sé
Outer, inner and secret enemies—be eliminated in basic space,
trang sum gal né tulshyuk lam lhong shok
And, traversing the three defiles, may we accomplish yogic conduct!

jam dang nyingjé dro nam jesu dzin
May we guide beings through loving kindness and compassion,
trinlé nampa shyi la tokpa mé
Be unhindered as we carry out the four kinds of activity,
yumchen chökü gongpa tsal dzok té
Perfect the strength of the great dharmakāya mother’s realization,
labkyi drönma khyé dang yermé shok
And become inseparable from you, Labkyi Drönma!

tubpé tenpa rimé dar shying gyé
May the non-sectarian teachings of the Buddha flourish and spread,
tendzin kyé nam shyabpé yündu ten
May the lives of the holders of the teachings long remain secure,
gendün dé pel jikten kham kün dé
May the saṅgha increase and all regions of the world be happy,
ta lok lhamin lalo jom gyur chik
And may those who hold wrong or barbaric views be overcome!

sipé tsawa dakdzin tekar chö
May we cut through ego-clinging, the root of saṃsāric existence,
tabshé yermé pé kyi gongpa la
Abide in the realization of Phaṭ—means and wisdom inseparable—
rangrig dü sum gyünché mepar né
Continuously throughout the three times, within our own awareness,
si sum ying drol khorwa dongtruk shok
And, by liberating the triple world in basic space, empty saṃsāra from its depths!

Thus, on the second completion of the light phase (i.e., the tenth day) of Saga Dawa in the
Fire Monkey year (1956), before the precious image in Zangri Kharmar, the pleasure grove that
delights the wisdom ḍākinī, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö (alias Pema Yeshe Dorje) offered this
prayer. Grant your blessings, I pray, so that it may become a cause of the direct realization
of the fundamental meaning of the great mother Prajñāpāramitā! Sarva maṅgalam!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2019.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "ma gcig lab sgron la bstod pa bdud bzhi dbyings gcod/"
in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012.
W1KG12986 Vol. 2: 743–746
↑ These are the four demons of Chöd practice (gcod yul bdud bzhi): 1) the substantial, tangible
or material demon (thogs bcas kyi bdud); 2) the insubstantial, intangible or immaterial
demon (thogs med kyi bdud); 3) the demon of elation or exultation (dga' brod kyi bdud) and
4) the demon of egotistical pride or conceit (snyems byed kyi bdud).↑ These are the four
māras (bdud bzhi): 1) the māra of the aggregates; 2) the māra of the afflictions; 3) the
māra of the lord of death; and 4) the devaputra or son-of-the-gods māra.