In Praise of Vārāṇasī, the Supreme Place

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti!

In this unique source of many hundred forms of auspiciousness,Site of the auspicious first turning
of the Dharma Wheel,Great forest grove, home to auspicious deer,May the auspicious
Great Sage grant auspiciousness!

Like an enchanted city of immortal godsTransposed directly from the heavens,Its splendid name,
Ṛṣipatana — 'Sages' Descent' —Nectar to the ears of all, past, present and future.

Here the supreme Sage, with the splendour of a hundred suns,Eclipsed the light of every other
being in the world,And all were compelled to shut their eyes simultaneously,As the brilliance
of virtue and goodness shone!

Upon the great adamantine throne of the Vajra Seat,You sat unmovingly in a single cross-legged
posture,And having reached the essence of enlightenment,Wended your way here — thus, may
there be virtue!

Here it was that your very first followers gathered,The five excellent disciples, intoxicated
with pride,Who had scolded you and sworn an oath.But, like dry grass suddenly set aflame,They
instantly arranged a seat of the finest materialsWhen they saw you, the sublime leader
of men, approach.And, like great vines falling to the earth,Prostrated themselves in reverence
and faith.

Then, with the light of compassion, you, a lion among men,Summoned Indra and Prajāpati (Brahmā),Who
arrived with a majestic, melodious soundAnd a blazing thousand-spoked wheel of gold.They
urged you to turn the sacred Dharma Wheel,And, upon a throne supported by lions,[1]You
sounded your fearless roarOf threefold formulation.[2]

You turned the precious wheel, unknown in former ages,In unsurpassable ways, heard up to the
very summit of existence,And eighty thousand deva sons and daughters saw the truth,As your
renown extended unto existence's peak.

Thus, in this supremely noble, sacred place,You performed the greatest of all a buddha's deeds,The
resonant speech-activity of a supreme nirmāṇakāya,To rouse beings from the slumber
of twofold ignorance.

Fragrantly scented trees are to be found here in abundance,And precious hills, rocky shelters
and grassy plains,All laid out like a maṇḍala of turquoise meadows,Where flowers, red and
white, vie with one another.

Pools of bathing water possess the eight qualities,Fine houses gleam as if made from lunar crystal,And
in the surface of the glittering marble[3]Reflections appear and are clearly seen.


Deer with magnificent coats graze and play,Heavenly birds call out in sweet, beguiling songs,Streams
bubble and splash as they flow along,And gods and sages dwell.

There are traces of the excellent deedsOf the great dharma-king Aśoka,Which are enough to stir
the mindWith faith and disenchantment.

Here too, amid many signs of degeneration,The one known as Dharmapāla of Ceylon,[4]An illustrious
king of Dharma, restored the place,As if encouraging a patient to rise from bed.

In a great casket of jewels and refined gold,Upon heaps of water crystal supported by a lotus,The
precious relics, shining white and black,Of the supreme Kinsman of the Sun, Lord of
Sages, were placed.

This is a place revered by all, including the gods;It is a field for amassing boundless stores
of merit,And a supremely sacred site, whose true valueExceeds even a cascade of wish-granting
gems.

What is more, great treasures lie beneath the earth,Compositions of the learned and accomplishedAll
arranged in garlands ready to burst forth,Truly bringing liberation upon sight.

May this place, where support and supported alike are sacred,Never decline but remain forever
indestructible as a vajraFor as long as the teachings themselves continue to abide,So that
the light of virtue and auspiciousness grows ever brighter!

Thus, the one called Tsuklak Lungrik Nyima Mawé Sengé (Chökyi Lodrö) wrote this while in this
very place. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey (with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and the kind
assistance of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche), 2018.