In Praise of Yangleshö in Nepal
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

shri benza heruka namo
Homage to the glorious Vajra Heruka!
barwé ku ni chik tu khyil
The blazing body of the heruka resides here,
yeshe drubpé chakgya ché
And the great mudrā, whose nature is wisdom.
döné drubpé womin ni
This is the primordial heaven of Akaniṣṭha,
sa dir pöpa mé du jung
Transferred into this very world—amazing!
dorjé lü kyi köpa ni
The features of the indestructible vajra body
chirol ngöpö chö su shar
Are all manifest here as external forms.
ché lek namshé dakpa yi
Look carefully: it is ornamented with the auspicious signs,
tashi tak kyi tsenmé tré
Representing the purest aspects of consciousness.
hang dang atung nyom shyuk kyi
There is a crystal white peak as a sign of union,
khajor tak su shel kar ri
The coming together of a HAṂ and A-stroke,
naktsal tukpö nampar dzé
Beautifully adorned with thickest woodland.
trulpé khorlo sa dzin ni
As the cakra of manifestation, the land
dumpo tiklé chik tu khyil
Lies in the shape of a sphere, a single bindu.
drenpa nam kö dang sil dzing
Awareness is represented by deep refreshing pools,
ngam la ro druk döyön chö
Offerings of the six tastes and sensual delights,
dekyi lhamö gar gyi tsen
With bliss-sustaining goddesses dancing and playing.
a dön kyemé tongpé dra
“A” is the sound of emptiness signifying the unborn nature,
suré nyöpé tulshyuk kyi
And “sura” the intoxicating drink of crazy yogic conduct.
wangchen ngampé dra drokpé
Proclaiming the fearsome sounds of great power,
dakdzin rudra nam sum shyom
The three kinds of ego-clinging rudra are destroyed,
palchen ku ngak chaktsen sok
And the great Glorious One’s enlightened form, mantra and attributes
pentsün drenpa shyindu tra
Manifest clearly all around, as if competing with one another.
pema gyalpo tötreng tsal
Here the Lotus King (Pema Gyalpo) Tötreng Tsal,
yangdak drubpa chenpo yi
On the night of the great accomplishment of Yangdak,
sö la dü nam ki lé dral
Liberated obstructing māras through Kīlaya,
torang ngönpar changchub nyé
And at dawn attained complete awakening.
dé yi jinlab drub né ché
As a result of this blessing, this great and sacred place
sa chen di na drenda wen
Is without equal anywhere upon the Earth.
chi nang sangwé denyi dang
Through these words of praise, elegantly composed,
lek jar köpé drayang kyi
Describing the outer, inner and secret nature of this place,
si sum drowa kün dral né
May all the beings of the three worlds be liberated,
sangwa chok gi drong juk shok
And may they enter the city of the supreme and secret practice.

lar yang chö ter bangdzö nam
Once again, may the store of priceless Dharma riches—
pa norbu yi chöpa dang
The treasures of the father—be enjoyed by his heirs,
sa sum rabgé yang drokpé
And may the melodious sounds of perfect joy resound throughout the three worlds,
dzamling küntu khyabpar shok
Pervading the whole of Jambudvīpa.

Composed by Dorje Zibar Tsal.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "bal yul yang le shod kyi gnas bstod/" in ’Jam dbyangs
chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol.
10: 383–384