In Praise of Mañjuśrī: Increasing Intelligence to the Full
by Mipham Rinpoche

dhih chok chu dü sum deshek sé ché kyi
Dhīḥ! Supreme enlightened form of all the buddhas and their heirs,
ku yi chok té sung gi wangchuk ché
Throughout the whole of space and time,
yeshe sempa jetsün jampal yang
Powerful lord of speech and embodiment of wisdom, precious Mañjughoṣa,
dak gi nying ü pemor taktu chö
Remain forever upon the lotus in the centre of my heart.

khyö ni dewar shekpa kün gyi yab
You are the father of all the buddhas who have gone to bliss,
malü pak tsok kün kyé chöying yum
And the dharmadhātu mother from whom all the noble ones are born,
dü sum gyalwé sé kyi tsul tönpa
Yet you appear as the son of the buddhas of past, present and future—
tsungmé khyö la güpé chaktsal tö
To you who are without equal, I prostrate in devotion!

chöying künkhyab gyutrul drawé gar
Play of the net of magical illusion which pervades the whole expanse of reality,
namkha jisi dro kün pendé dzö
Treasury of universal benefit and happiness for as long as space exists,
tamché nyamnyi yeshe dorjé ku
Embodiment of the vajra wisdom of all-encompassing equality,
jampal shyönnu khyö la chaktsal tö
To you, Mañjuśrī the ever-youthful, I prostrate and offer praise!

marser nyima char khé langtso chen
With the vibrant splendour of the orange sun rising in the sky,
nying la tsungmé dé ter shyönnu zuk
Your youthful form brings to my heart a delight beyond compare.
lhadzé dar dang rinchen metok gi
Adorned with divine garments of silk and with jewels and flowers,
rab dzé zur pü ngaden kyil trung shyuk
You sit cross-legged, with your long hair tied up in five main knots.

sherab öbar yeshe raldri yi
With wisdom’s sword that blazes with the light of intelligence,
dü chom münpé tibpo nampar dral
You subdue the maras and cut the darkness of our ignorance.
yi ong utpal shyönnü chaktsen gyi
With the fresh and lovely utpala flower clasped in your hand,
yi la gang dö་dampa chok jin dze
You show the mudrā of generosity, and grant our every wish.

jetsün khyé ku drenpé mö nyi la
In the very instant we think upon your perfect form, O precious one,
trulnang khorwé münpa tar jé ching
All the darkness of samsara and deluded perception is at an end,
yangdak lam zang tongwé nangwa jin
And you grant us the light with which to perceive the genuine path,
yi la nyinmor jepe pal tsolwa
As if the sun’s glorious radiance had been brought into our minds!

sherab yeshe kuchen jampé dpal
‘Gentle Splendour,’ Mañjuśrī, embodiment of wisdom and intelligence,
dak nying chukyé shyepé gesar la
Respectfully I offer you this seat upon the lotus of my heart,
güpé ti shying rik ngak gyalpo yi
And I invoke your wisdom mind, O protector,
gönpo khye kyi tukdam gyü kul na
Through the sovereign of all awareness-mantras.

tsikdön nampar jepé lodrö tu
Swiftly set ablaze a great fire of wisdom within my heart,
chok tu no nyur gyache rab zabpa
A powerful intelligence discerning words and meaning,
kün sal nyidé kyilkhor dang tsungpé
Supremely keen, swift, utterly profound and expansive,
sherab mé chen nying la nyur du por
Illuminating all, like the maṇḍalas of the sun and moon.

shyumpa dang dral gang gi mi dzi shying
Grant me too the confidence of eloquence,
tokmé gyünchak dzepa yong pangwa
That is unhesitating, entirely unassailable,
jikpa mepa dorjé tabu yi
Unhindered, constant, never dissipating—
pobpé chok dé dak la drubpar dzö
A vajra-like fearlessness that is indestructible.

tsik dang dön gyi nampa malü nam
Grant me the great treasure of infallible memory,
namyang jepé nongpa machipa
Which is as broad and all-encompassing as space,
namkha tabur gokab yangpa yi
And is entirely unerring, so that never will I forget
mizé zung kyi terchen dak la tsol
Any aspect whatsoever of the words or of the meaning.

drinpé otsor yangchen gyerolwé
Through Sarasvatī’s delight as she plays at my throat,
khé nam shintu yitrok tsik gi nyam
May I achieve the power of mastery over speech,
dütsi roden yi rab sim jepé
And my words entice and enchant the learned,
ngak gi wangchuk drubpar dzé du sol
Like the taste of sweetest nectar, bringing pleasure to their minds.

gyal dang gyalsé nyenrang pak tsok dang
From the whole of this world—from the buddhas, bodhisattvas,
lha lu mi dang nö jin drangsong sok
And the noble assembly of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas,
jikten kün na gang chi lodrö kyi
From gods, nāgas, humans, yakṣas, sages and the like—
pal nam yi la rabtu gukpar dzö
I invoke the splendour of intelligence, summoning it into my mind!

tö sam gompé kyilkhor yongsu dzok
May I perfect the spheres of study, reflection and meditation,
ché tsö tsompé özer rabtu sal
Shine bright the lights of explanation, debate and composition,
nyemmé shyiwa shyenpen nying tsé dang
And possess humility, calm, altruism, kindhearted love and faith,
dé sok yönten gyatsö dzé gyur chik
The most beautiful and perfect qualities, as boundless as the ocean.

dé yi tu lé gyalwé tenpa la
Through the power of this, may I accomplish vast deeds
jawa gyachen chok tu rab gyi ching
To benefit the teachings of the victorious buddhas,
jampal pawö gyé shyin jezung né
And always delight and be cared for by Mañjuśrī,
rangshyen dön nyi lhün gyi drubpar shok
Spontaneously accomplishing my own and others’ welfare!

This praise and aspiration for increasing intelligence with verses equal in number to the fourteen
vital essences (dwangs ma) of the animate and inanimate was written by Mipham Jampal
Gyepa on an auspicious day during the ninth month of the Fire Horse year (1906). May virtue
abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2006. Originally published on www.lotsawaschool.org