In Praise of Jetsün Mila Shepa Dorje

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

In reality, you have entirely forsaken the web of conceptuality,And already awakened in the
indestructible essence of Akṣobhya,Yet, impelled by the forceful winds of compassion,Like
a blossoming uḍumbara flower, you appeared as Dorje Gyaltsen.

When the fierce winds of dispute swept through your family,You caused a rain of hailstones that
wrought havoc and destruction,As cherished possessions were all brought to nothing.And
your reputation as a powerful master of sorcery grew.

Connected by the golden thread of your past aspirations,The very moment you heard the name of
Hevajra Marpa,You felt a surge of perfect joy, and, at the same time,The heruka himself
revealed his smiling face.

Having tamed completely your apparent physical body, the residue of past karma,Just like purifying
and refining gold,As soon as the seed of the four vajras was planted,Hundreds of doorways
to conditioned existence were sealed,And the impure elements were consumed in the fire
of tummo.Melting and taming the moon-like syllable HAṂ,Maturing the strength of the essences
and releasing the channels, energies and elements.

In the very same life, you gained the supreme accomplishment: Emaho!The crown jewel of siddhas
adorning the northern Land of Snows,Many millions of vidyādharas humbly bowed before you,And
placed your lotus feet on the crown of their heads,And the whole area was filled with
accomplished yogins and yoginīs.

The sweet melody of your spontaneous vajra songs of sound and emptiness,Is like nectar for the
ears of each and every being.Even to encounter only fragments of your enlightened speech
which liberates upon hearing,Causes experience and realisation to increase just like the
waxing moon,Such is your incomparable kindness, Precious Master, Jetsün Dorje Chang!

From this moment on, Mila Shepa Dorje,May you remain forever in the centre of my heart, without
ever separating,So that the brilliant light of co-emergent wisdom shines ever brighter!

This prayer was made with intense faith and devotion by the one called Chökyi Lodrö. May it
be virtuous and auspicious!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2013.