In Praise of Jigme Lingpa’s Pre-Eminence
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

om swasti
Oṃ svasti!
künkhyen mang yang nang dön zikpa kön
There are many whose knowledge is universal but few who see the inner meaning.
jikme lingpa chönyi denpa zik
Jigme Lingpa saw the truth of dharmatā.

khepa mang yang drubpa tobpa kön
There are many scholars but few who attain accomplishment.
rangjung dorjé pakpé sa tor shek
Rangjung Dorje reached the exalted level of an ārya.

khepar jang yang ma lab shepa kön
There are many who study and become learned but few who understand without training.
khyentsé nyugu chö nam rangdrol khyen
Khyentse Nyugu realized the self-liberation of phenomena.

gomchen mang yang rigpa ngöngyur kön
There are many great meditators but few who realize pure awareness.
künkhyen chenpo nang shyi zé sar khyol
The great Omniscient One arrived at the exhaustion of the four visions.

dro dön jé kyang shyendön jungwa kön
There are those who act for beings but few who secure the welfare of others.
lob gyü nam kyi tenpa kha tar dal
This master’s lineage of disciples spread the teachings unto the far reaches of space.

tsompa mang yang lek shé jungwa kön
There are many works of literature but few that are well expressed.
lamé sung rab gyalwé ka dang tsung
This guru’s writings are equal to the Buddha’s own Words.

detar nyikdü bö kham kyongwé gön
Such was this guardian who looked after Tibet in the degenerate age,
pema wangchen yeshe rolpa tsal
Pema Wangchen Yeshe Rolpa Tsal.
jampal shenyen bi ma mi tra nam
An actual manifestation of Mañjuśrīmitra and Vimalamitra,
ngö su jön dang namyer machipé
And inseparable from them—
jikdral lingpé shyab la chaktsal lo
Jigdral Lingpa, to you I pay homage!

kyewa di dang tserab tamché du
In this life and in all my future lives,
khyé dang kechik mindral drokpa dang
May I always accompany you, never parting even for a moment.
tuk yi chik dré rigpa ösal gyi
May my mind merge with your wisdom mind.
ku sum lhündrub shyönnu bumku ru
And may all be auspicious so that I gain awakening in the youthful vase body,
ngönpar changchub tobpé tashi shok
Wherein the luminous three kāyas are spontaneously present!

By Jigme Namkhé Dorje.1

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "'jigs med gling pa'i khyad 'phags bstod pa/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 2: 581–582

Version: 1.1-20220201
↑ One of Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö’s many names.