In Praise of Sönam Palge

by Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpai Nyima

Namo guru!Noble guru, even your name is a treasury of merit,Your liberative life a splendour
of learning and joy.If we pray to you, you are a source of allThe virtue and goodness of
the attainments.[1]

Your family was that of the noble Mukpo Dong,And within it you belonged to the merchant class.You
were born into the noble Drama household,And the year of your birth year was the male
Iron Monkey.[2]

You were large in stature and your senses acute;Your limbs and torso were stout and physically
strong;Your head was broad like a parasol;And your upper body resembled that of a lion.


Your mind was clear and you were eloquent and bold.You were brave, steadfast and courageous.Your
character was thus exceedingly positive—Compassionate and enthusiastic for Dharma.

The lotus of your noble character,With such natural qualities as these,Was first enhanced by
the water-likeInstructions of the Dzogchenpa of Do Valley.[3]

You then followed many other learned and accomplished onesAnd studied the works of the great
scholars of India and Tibet,So that you became just like an excellent vaseFilled with the
nectar of empowerments, transmissions and instructions.

Through the sevenfold mind training, the paths of generation and perfection,And especially through
training single-pointedlyIn the yoga of the luminous heart-essence,You attained profound,
flexible meditative absorption.

Together with the king of yogic adepts,[4]You roamed among the great vajra places,And through
drinking the wine of the blessingsOf vīras and ḍākinīs you were constantly intoxicated.


With vital and downward-clearing winds dispersed in the space of the central channel,The light
of caṇḍālī pervaded and overcame the other two channels,So that you were filled with supreme
vernal joy,And saw the definitive truth of the Middle Way.

Everything—environment and beings—arose as bliss,And this rapturous display continued day and
night,So that you moved about as fearlessly as a lionThrough this world of sorrowful existence.


Your explanations were erudite, your compositions magnificent,Your answers were always profound
and grounded in reason,So that even amidst many precious masters of mantraYou stood out
like smelted, crafted and burnished gold.

A guide to beings and an eye for this world,You served as the guru of many sublime beingsIncluding
Orgyen Chökyi Wangpo,[5]And became a vital trunk of the Dharma of Nyingtik.

Still, you kept your yogic discipline hidden,And while maintaining the lifestyle of a tantric
householder,You brought great benefit to those who saw or heard you.While talking little
to those without depth.

Until your eighty-fifth year you lived[6]Without any trace of physical illness.Then, while reciting
the text of Mañjuśrīnāmasaṃgīti,You passed into the realm of absolute peace.

When I think of the great fortuneOf those of us who touched the feetOf such an accomplished
heruka, I rejoice,And fold my hands together in devotion a hundred times!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.