In Praise of Devāvatāra, Site of Buddha's Descent from Heaven[1]

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti!Blessed conqueror, Lion of the Śākyas,I bow in reverence at your feet with their thousand-spoked
wheels,And offer praise to this, the most wondrous of sites,Where you descended
from the realm of the gods.

Ornament of the world, vast and expansive in all directions,This is a valley of medicinal plants,
flowers and forests,Which rivals in its beauty the celestial playgroundOf the three
devas Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva.Heavenly rivers carry flecks of gold and silver,A great treasury
and source of varied gems.Peacocks perform their delightful dance,And the Dharma is intoned
in attractive voices.Gods and human beings gather and play as if in a vision —To see
this and to rest here sets the mind at ease,And causes disturbances in mind and energy to
subside.In this great pleasure grove that delighted the Lord of SagesMāyādevī, who bore the
supreme Kinsman of the Sun,Through the display of delighting in illusory passion,Was brought
here through the chariot of non-referential love,And when the glorious lady of summer
showed herself,The voice of Brahmā sounded the great drum of Dharma.Gods who had slumbered
in the sleep of carelessnessWere awakened and light-rays of noble Dharma shone forth.The
ground of seeing the truth was thoroughly tilled,And fresh shoots of awakening started to
grow.

Ema! The devas experienced myriad joys of Dharma,The likes of which they had not known before.Cymbals
resounded, chiming melodies of praise,A single divine month passed, and thenThe
supreme Sage decided to return to Earth.To herald this descent from heavenThe play of sitars
struck up spontaneously,And upon a staircase of precious lapus lazuli,He descended in elephantine
strides.The celestial retinues offered gifts on an unimaginable scale,To fill the
sky like specks of dust glittering in a sunbeamAnd slowly falling as a wondrous, delightful
spectacleFor each and every being to witness and enjoy.And that Lord of Sages made as
a representativeTook seven steps as well, as if in rivalry.[2]

At that time, through the Victorious One's compassionA precious and blessed stūpa was formed,As
a magnificent field for accumulating merit.And there were signs of auspiciousness and
virtue in abundance.

May the sacred Dharma, which is like healing nectar,Spoken by the peerless Teacher, the unrivalled
Ikṣvāku,As well as the teachings of those who uphold it,The assemblies of the ārya
saṅgha, flourish and spread!

Thus, through honouring just partially in this wayThe deeds of that towering splendour, the
great victorious Sage,With what is no more than a hair-tip of praise,May we gather entirely
the two sacred accumulations!

Throughout our lives, may we and all other beingsAlways be accepted by the Buddha, deity of
deities,May we traverse the five paths and ten stages,And spontaneously accomplish both our
own and others' aims!

Thus, in the male Wood Monkey year,[3] while on pilgrimage to the sacred places of the noble
land of India, I visited the great site of the descent from heaven, known as Sāṃkāśya. I,
Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, wrote this on the outskirts of that very place. May it become a cause
for gaining the ability to sound the music of praise to the sugatas in each and every lifetime!
Maṅgalam!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey (with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and the kind
assistance of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche), 2018.