Intensely Brilliant Wisdom

In Praise of the Great Elder Smṛtijñāna

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru jñānakāyāya!

With the splendour of your supreme wisdom bodyYou dispel delusion’s darkness from the three
worlds.Mañjughoṣa guru, Smṛtijñāna, I honour you evermoreAs an inseparable adornment on the
top of my crown.

Great paṇḍita of the noble land,Most exalted at the head of all,You are the marvellous great
elder,Resplendent in your pre-eminence.

The great pioneers Maitreya, Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga,As well as Dignāga, Dharmakīrti, Candragomin,Candrakīrti
and the other adornments of this worldPassed on the fruits of their intellect
to you.

Outwardly you were peaceful and tame, in conduct like a śrāvaka,Inwardly you possessed the vast
wish-fulfilling tree of bodhicitta,And secretly you were endowed with the great siddhi
of mantra—To this lord of scholars and adepts, I offer homage and praise.

You terrified the beast-like tīrthikas and defeated them,Sounded the victory drum of authentic
scripture and reasoning,And raised aloft the magnificent banner of Buddha’s teachingsFrom
the noble land in the neighbouring realm of high mountains.

The scent of your superior ethical discipline permeated everywhere far and wide,You emerged
from from equipoise in an array of undefiled meditative absorptions,And with profound insight
you unlocked the eight treasures of courageous eloquence—[1]To you who mastered an ocean
of the wisdom of twofold knowledge, I offer praise.

In the valleys between the snowy peaks of the north,As a great master, you shone as brightly
as the moon,With your profound wisdom mind deep as the ocean,And for a fortunate few you
were directly accessible.

To highlight the effects of actions and what to do and avoid,You guided your birth-giving mother
from the ephemeral hells,Wandering in confusion and employing means to overcome evil
forms—To you who guided her safely to the heavenly realms, I offer praise.

Your great commentary on the Praise Expressed in Song,[2]As well as other wondrous and amazing
writings and translationsRelated to the sūtras, tantras and other branches of knowledge,Were
all lauded by sublime beings who played the flutes of praise.

Your wisdom knowledge was equal to the limits of space,Your loving compassion as intense as
apocalyptic storms,And your mighty power comparable to that of Vajrapāṇi himself—O protector,
you are the crowning glory of existence and peace.

In your countless representations, supports for reverence,You inspire faith in all and sundry,
even unto the ends of time,And guard against the terrors of this and future lives—You who
are universally renowned as Smṛtijñāna.

In the region of Den your manifestation faded into absolute space,Your physical form of karmic
ripening merged into the earth,And the great king of jewels remained forever stable,Sacred
relics that continue to benefit the teachings and beings.

An object of reverence for devas, human beings and nāgas,Which when invoked through prayer fulfils
every desire,This wondrous great stūpa is clearly beyond compare,A supreme foundation
of benefit and happiness in this world.

Through your countless, unimaginable manifestations,Your carry out great waves of activity to
liberate beings,And for as long as the earth and Sumeru continue to abideBring vast effortless
and spontaneous benefit—to you I offer praise.

The inexhaustible stream of merit that accrues from such praise,Like the flow of the Ganges,
I dedicate to the spread of the teachings.Now and in all my lives to come, may I always remain
inseparableFrom you, the sublime master Smṛtijñāna.

This garland of words arose during the Earth Dog[3] year following a surge of faith brought
on by the compounded delusion of a dream. May it become a cause for the great elder’s blessings
to seep into the heart. Maṅgalam. Śubham.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.