Music to Delight the Ḍākinī
A Praise to the Deathless Mandāravā
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Namo gurujñāna dākinyai!

shintu nampar dakpé yeshe lé
From pristine primordial wisdom
zungjuk tsen pé nangchar yong sharwa
Your union-form appears, of major and minor marks.
drenpé tsé dang yeshe chok tsolwé
By our act of recalling it, ultimate life and wisdom are bestowed.
chimé mendara ba khyö la tö
Deathless Mandāravā, I offer you praise!

yitrok pema ragé tsar dukchen
You are a mesmerizing beauty, like a lotus ruby.
si dang shyiwa yermé dzum shyal la
Your smile displays the unity of existence and peace.
namtar sum gyi chen ré rab yowé
Your flashing eyes reveal the three liberations.
dro kün khorwa drol dzé khyö la tö
You free all beings from saṃsāra: I offer you praise!

chak yé tukjé chenpö driguk gi
With your curved knife of supreme compassion raised aloft in your right hand,
dü shyi nying gi tenpa trok né lar
You steal away the four māras’ hearts. And then,
yönpé dütsi gangwé tö bum gyi
With your left hand holding the amṛta-filled skull-cup,
drub la ngödrub tsol dzé khyö la tö
You bestow the siddhis upon practitioners: I offer you praise!

ku shyi yeshe ngaden heruka
Your skillful-means consort is Mighty Skull-Garland Lotus,
tab kyi chakgya pema tötreng tsal
Heruka of the four kāyas and the five pristine wisdoms.
kha tam tsul gyi yön né trilwa yi
He cradles you in his left arm in khaṭvāṅga’s form,
nyom juk gyepa kyé dzé khyö la tö
And so arouses exultant union: I offer you praise!

nak num utra silbur changwa la
Your shiny black hair falls gracefully down your back
pundariké tö kyi lek ching shing
And is adorned at your crown with a stunning puṇḍarīka flower.
dar dang rinchen rüpé chakgya yi
Wearing silks and jewels and the symbolic bone ornaments,
tokpé khorlo chö dzé khyö la tö
You cut right through the spindle of thoughts: I offer you praise!

shyab nyi yé kum si la mi né shing
Your right leg is drawn in, for you dwell not in existence,
yön kyang shyiwé ta ru lhung minpar
And your left leg is extended, for you renounce the extreme of peace.
zungdzin bamrö nyinggar rolpa yi
Thus you dance upon the heart of duality’s dead body
zungjuk nya ngen depa khyö la tö
And so enter the union that transcends all anguish: I offer you praise!

gang ku tongwé drub nyi dukpar jo
Whoever sees your body gains the boon of the two siddhis.
sung sang töpé dechen yeshe bar
Whoever hears your sacred speech, they blaze with the wisdom of great bliss.
drenpa yi kyang tsé yi barché kün
For whoever thinks of you, all obstacles to longevity are cleared away.
sel dzé khandrö tsomo khyö la tö
O foremost ḍākinī queen, I offer you praise!

nöchü zabsal nyimé kyilkhor cher
In this great maṇḍala where environment and beings Are manifest as the nonduality of profound
clarity,
yong shar depa ngak kyi gyü kul shying
We invoke your wisdom mind through mantra recitation
yingrik zungjuk ngang du nyamshyak pé
And let be in the continuous union of basic space and awareness.
tsek chik khyö kyi shyabpé lek nyen na
As by this means, wholeheartedly, we approach your noble lotus feet,

ngö nyam milam tsam gyi nangcha ru
Please show us your smiling face––in actuality, visions, and dreams!
gyepé shyal ten sung gi ukyung shying
Grant us poise and assurance with your sacred speech!
tsé sö paljor wang chü yeshe la
Grant us long life, merit, prosperity, and the wisdom of the ten powers,
ten né chimé gopang nyur drub dzö
And help us to swiftly reach the deathless state!

The one who bears the name of the foremost of accomplished vidyādharas, Padma, spontaneously
made this prayer to the ḍākinī Mandāravā. Siddhirastu.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2020 (trans. Laura Dainty and Stefan Mang; ed. Libby Hogg).

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "'chi med man+dA ra ba la bstod pa DA ki dgyes pa'i rol mo/"
in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980.
Vol. 1: 475–476