Praise of Noble Avalokiteśvara
by Bhikṣuṇī Lakṣmī

om, jikten gönpo la chaktsal lo
Oṃ. Homage to the Lord of the World!
jikten lama sipa sum gyi töpa po
Guru of all, you are honoured by the three worlds,
lha yi tsowo dü dang tsangpé töpa po
You are lauded by leading gods, Māra and Brahmā,
tubpé gyal chok töpé drubpar dzepapo
When praised, you bring the highest victory of a sage—
jikten sum gyi gönpo chok la chaktsal lo
Supreme lord of the three worlds, to you I pay homage!

deshek pakmé ku té ku zang dzin pa po
Your excellent form contains countless bliss-gone buddhas.
deshek nangwa tayé ugyen dzin pa po
You bear the Buddha Boundless Light at your crown.
chak yé chok jin yidak trekom sel wa po
Your right hand is bountiful, dispelling the pretas’ famine and drought
chak yön ser gyi pemé nampar gyen pa po
And your left is perfectly adorned with a golden lotus.
drishyim ralpé trengwa marser khyuk pa po
Your fragrant locks of hair are golden and glistening.
shyalré gyepa dawa tabur dzé pa po
Your broad face is as lovely as the moon.
chen gyi pema chok tu zang shying yang pa po
Your lotus-eyes are supremely beautiful and wide.
khawa dung tar namkar dringé den pa po
Your body is as white as snow or conch and sweetly scented.
drimé ö chak mutik tsombu dzin pa po
You clasp a string of immaculate, gleaming pearls.
dzepé özer kya reng marpö gyen pa po
You radiate rays of dazzling light, red as the dawn.
pemé tso tar chak ni ngarwar jé pa po
Your arms are perfectly poised like lotuses on a lake;
tönké trin gyi dok dangden shying shyön pa po
They are youthful and white as autumn clouds.
rinchen mangpö pungwa nyi ni gyen pa po
Your two shoulders are adorned with many jewels.
lomé chok tar chak til shyön shying jam pa po
Your palms are youthful and as gentle as a leaf.
ridak pakpé numa yönpa kab pa po
Your left breast is draped with a deerskin.
nyencha dubü gek ching gyen nam chang wa po
You are adorned with earrings, bracelets and anklets.
drima mepé pemé chok la né pa po
You rest upon a supreme, unsullied lotus.
tewé ngö ni pemé dab tar jam pa po
Your navel is as soft as a lotus petal.
ser gyi ké rak chok la norbü tré pa po
Your supreme golden belt is jewel-encrusted.
ta zur tripé ré zang shamtab dzin pa po
Your waist is girdled with a garment of finest cloth.
tubpé khyen chok tso chen parol chin pa po
You transcend the great ocean with the supreme knowledge of a sage.
chok nyé sönam mangpo nyewar sak pa po
You have amassed abundant merit and attained pre-eminence.
taktu dewé jungné ga né sel wa po
You banish old age and sickness and are a wellspring of eternal joy.
sum tar dzé ching khachö chöpa tön pa po
You bring the three to an end1 and display celestial action.
lüchen chok té düpung truk lé gyal wa po
You are supreme among the embodied, triumphant over demonic hordes.
ser gyi kang dub dra yi shyab yi ong wa po
Your golden anklets chime merrily at your feet.2
tsangpé nepa shyi yi wenpar dze pa po
You create beauty3 through the four brahma abodes;
ngangwé drö dra langchen drek drar shek pa po
You move with swan-like grace and elephantine majesty.
tsok kün nyewar sak shing tenpa nyer wa po
You have gathered all accumulations and pursue the teachings.4
omé tso dang chu yi tso lé drol wa po
You liberate from the sea of milk and ocean of water.5

gangshyik taktu torang lang né güpa yi
Whoever rises regularly at the break of dawn,
chenrezik kyi wangpo yi la sem jé ching
Devotedly brings Lord Avalokiteśvara to mind,
töpé chok di dak ching salwar tö jé na
And eulogizes him with these supreme praises
dé ni kyepa am yangna bümé yin yang rung
Will, no matter whether they be male or female,
kyewa di dang ma ong kyewa tamché du
Find that both in this world and in all future lives,
jikten jikten lé dé göpa kün drub gyur
All their needs, mundane and transcendent, are fulfilled!

This concludes the Praise of Noble Avalokiteśvara by Bhikṣuṇī Lakṣmī.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019, with reference to the commentary of Drakpa Shedrup (grags
pa bshad sgrub, 1675–1748).
↑ i.e., the three sufferings↑ In the Tengyur version this line occurs earlier.↑ Drakpa Shedrup
points out that dben pa which has the general meaning of seclusion also has an ancient
sense of that which is attractive or appealing.↑ An alternative version of this line reads:
You who have gathered the stores and reveal all dharmas.↑ Here the sea of milk signifies
nirvāṇa and the ocean of water, saṃsāra. The Tengyur version of this line reads: You who
liberate from the sea of suffering and ocean of afflictions.