Ripples on the Ganges
In Praise of the Goddess Sarasvatī
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

om swasti
Oṃ svasti!
pakchok tukjé dawa yi
Lady of language, who manifested from
shyal gyi chukyé chewa lé
The canine teeth of the lotus-like face
ngönpar trulpé draden ma
Of the sublime and noble moon of mercy—1
tsangpé semor töpar gyi
Daughter of Brahmā, to you I offer praise!

lhamo rikjé yang dangden
Goddess of the vedas and of eloquence,
sara swati shyé drakpa
The one called Sarasvatī, 'She Who Flows',
si dang shyiwé khong su nyen
Renowned throughout existence and peace—
yangchenma la chaktsal tö
Sweet Voiced Lady, to you I offer praise!

dawa dung dang ku muta shyal
Your face is like the moon, a conch or water lily,
minma nak num u tpal mik
With blackish brows above blue lotus eyes.
ké kab tra la nyö bum to
You have a slender waist, high, alluring bosom,
sangwé pemo dzum la tö
And secret smiling lotus—to you I offer praise!

tsenden sa chok drisung tul
You bear the scent of white sandalwood,
shyal gyi chab zek lhé dütsi
And your mouth is graced with heavenly nectar.
tongwa tsam gyi jikten sum
The mere sight of you is enough to captivate
yitrok ma la chaktsal tö
The three worlds—to you I offer praise!

sangye changchub sempa dang
All the buddhas, bodhisattvas,
nyentö ranggyal tamché dang
Śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas,
lha dang drangsong drub rigdzin
Devas, sages, and accomplshed vidyādharas—
tamchen tamché khyé la dü
They all—each and every one—bow to you!

kyilkhor kün gyi rik kyi yum
Mother of the families of all maṇḍalas,
tro dang duwé jepo chok
Supreme enacter of emanation and absorption,
ying yum sherchin kunzang mo
Space-like mother, Prajñāpāramitā, Samantabhadrī—
dorjé yang kyi gyalmor tö
Queen of vajra melody, to you I offer praise!2

detar töpé gewé tü
Through the virtuous force of this praise,
zab ching gyaché lodrö pel
May my understanding of the profound and vast increase,
khyen nyinang ba rabgyé né
And, with the light of twofold wisdom expanded,
tamché khyen zik chok drub shok
May I attain the supreme state of universal insight!

Chökyi Lodrö prayed in this way during the month of kṛttikā in the Fire Monkey year while travelling
by boat along the river Ganges. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2019.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "lha mo dbyangs can la bstod pa gang+gA'i rlabs phreng
/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012.
W1KG12986 Vol. 2: 419–420
↑ According to the Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra, Sarasvatī was born from the canine teeth of Avalokiteśvara.↑
Both available editions have rdo rje dbyangs here, but it is possibly an error for
rdo rje dbyings, i.e., 'queen of vajra space'.