Snowy Lands: Praises to the Great Dharma Emperor Tri Songdetsen
by Mipham Rinpoche

gangchen drowa tab kyi duljé chir
To tame the people of the Snowy Land
gyalsé tuwo jetsün jampé yang
The foremost bodhisattva, Noble Mañjuśrī,
böyul gyalpö tsul du lek nangwa
You gracefully appeared in the form of Tibet’s emperor —
trisong detsen shyab la chaktsal tö
Tri Songdetsen, to you I offer homage and praise.

nyida zung dré khen lob nam nyi sok
You brought the Master and Abbot, like sun and moon, together,
gyagar pendrub bö kyi lotsawa
Along with Indian paṇḍitas and translators from Tibet.
gangchen pendé jepo trulpé ku
Destined emanation for the benefit and happiness of Tibetans —
nam mang duwar dzé la chaktsal tö
Gatherer of Many, to you I offer homage and praise.

rigpé né dang dogyü tenchö shyung
Commissioning and checking the unerring translations
manor gyur shyü ten la pab dzé ching
Of all the fields of knowledge, the sūtras, tantras, and commentaries,
shedrub tenpé gyaltsen rabtu dreng
Gallantly you raised the victory banner of learning and practising the teachings —
ngadak chenpo khyé la chaktsal tö
Grand Sovereign, to you I offer homage and praise.

ta shyi gyalkham tob kyi wang du dü
You brought kingdoms of all the four directions under your control,
tsuklakhang dang ku sung tuk kyi ten
Constructed a temple with supports of enlightened body, speech, and mind,
do ngak dzinpé dé nyi bö du kö
And entrusted Tibet with the twofold collection of sūtra and mantra —
böyul kyong dzé khyé la chaktsal tö
Protector of Tibet, to you I offer homage and praise.

natsok tab kyi chösi zung du kyong
By various means you unified both government and dharma,
ka tsen sol zang gyalkham dé la kö
Securing the empire’s well-being under the order of tradition excellent.
ngadak tsangpa lha yi metok ché
Your pleasing name, “Brahma’s Divine Flower,” spread throughout the world —
nyenpé sateng khyab la chaktsal tö
Emperor, to you I offer homage and praise.

chemchok dütsi drubpa ngön du gyur
Accomplishing the supreme amṛta above all others,
tingdzin yomé gongpé tsal chen dzok
Perfecting the great potency of unwavering samādhi,
tsema lasok lek shé tenchö pel
You caused authentic knowledge, elegant speech and commentaries to flourish —
chö kyi gyalpo khyé la chaktsal tö
Dharma King, to you I offer homage and praise.

sangye lé kyang ché kön sang ngak kyi
Through the pith instructions and treatises of the secret mantra,
shyungluk nam dang dé yi damngak gi
Rarer even than the appearance of a buddha,
bhoté yul di o di ya na dang
You made this land of Tibet equal to Uḍḍiyāna:
tsungpar dzepa khyé la chaktsal tö
To you I offer homage and praise.

ying kyi khandrö gyé tab zabsang chö
The ḍākinīs of all-encompassing space concealed the profound and secret dharma,
sü kyang nyepar kawa nanggyü sum
Making the three inner tantras difficult to find,
drub chok nam kyi yong lang norbü ter
Yet extensively the masters have revealed these jewel-like treasures —
sa dir gö dzé khyé la chaktsal tö
Warden of this Land, to you I offer homage and praise.

silden rawa karpö jong di na
In these valleys ringed by cold white mountains
gyalwé ten dang dé dzin düpé dé
Reside the teachings of the Buddha and those who safeguard them.
jinyé jungwa gönpo khyö kyi drin
It is due to your kindness that all this has come to pass —
kadrin drendral khyé la chaktsal tö
Incomparable Kindness, to you I offer homage and praise.

dadung sangye tenpa né kyi bar
For as long as the Buddha’s teachings remain,
natsok trulpé gyalwé tenpa dang
There will come your emanations with the purpose of ensuring
gangchen pendé pelwar dzepa yi
The proliferation of the Dharma and the well-being of Tibet —
tukkyé nyammé khyé la chaktsal tö
To you whose bodhicitta aspiration is unequalled I offer homage and praise.

dakchak gangri trö né mi nam kyi
It is thanks to your kindness
gyalten rinchen chö kyi dra tsam yang
That the people of our snowy homeland
nawar töpa khyö kyi drin yin na
Have at least heard of the great and precious buddhadharma —
loden su shyik khyé la chi migü
No sensible person could lack respect for you.

dechir dak ni dé mö tsechik pé
Thus, with one-pointed faith and admiration,
gönpo khyö la tö ching chaktsal na
I pay homage to you and offer praise, Protector!
ngön gyi tukkyé damcha chenpo yi
With your great long-standing bodhicitta pledge,
dakchak jezung jingyi lab par dzö
Please care for us and grant your blessings.

chok chü gyalwé wangkur lungten ching
Through the empowerments and transmissions of all the buddhas of all directions,
chenrezik kyi tukkyé tutsenpé
And through the bodhicitta strength of Avalokiteśvara,
jampal trulpé gyalpö tuk shyé shyin
In accordance with the aspirations of Mañjuśrī’s supreme emanation,
gyalten yündu nepa nyi gyur chik
May the teachings of the Buddha remain steadfast.

tayé dro kün tuk tsé yongsu zung
Ever-embracing infinite beings with compassion and love,
namkha jisi shyenpen trinlé chö
For as long as space endures, you act for the benefit of others.
gyalsé pawo nam kyi tsuk gi gyen
Protector, crown ornament of the bodhisattvas,
gönpo khyé dang tsungpar dak gyur chik
May I become your equal!

khyé la tö ching solwa tabpé tü
Through the power of praising and supplicating you,1
dak sok gangdu nepé sachok der
In whatever land I and others find ourselves to be,
né dang ulpong tabtsö shyiwa dang
May sickness, poverty, and strife be pacified,
chö dang tashi pelwar dzé du sol
And may the Dharma flourish and auspiciousness increase!

gyal dang gyalwé sé kyi mönlam dang
Through the pure aspirations of the buddhas and their heirs,
dakchak mö gé nampar karwé tü
And through the virtue of our own admiration,
ngadak chö kyi gyalpo trisong jé
May all be auspiciousness for the teachings to spread in all directions
tukkyé tenpa tar gyé tashi shok
In accordance with the awakened aspirations of Lord Tri Song, the Dharma Sovereign!

These sixteen verses, equal in number to the sixteen offering goddesses, were written down in
the year of the male Fire Horse, on the 27th lunar day of the eighth month,2 by Mipham Jampel
Gyepa. May virtue and excellence flourish!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2018. (Translated by Stefan Mang and Kaleb Yaniger. Edited by
Libby Hogg.)
↑ Here Mipham states in small commentarial script that these verses are renowned as being the
speech of Tri Songdetsen, the Great Dharma Emperor, himself.↑ Monday, 15th October, 1906.