Sweet Melody to Delight the Glorious Deity
In Praise of Śrī Kālīdevī
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo śrī mahākālīdevyai!

palchen tuk lé trulpé lhamo ni
Goddess emanated from the heart of the great and glorious deity,
dakmé tongpa döndam chö kyi ying
The ultimate space of phenomena, empty and devoid of self,
nampa kün gyi chok dang rabden ma
You who fully possess the supreme of all aspects
khordé künkhyab kuntuzangmor tö
And pervade saṃsāra and nirvāṇa—Samantabhadrī, to you I offer praise.1

deshyin nyi ying trö tsen mi tok kyang
The basic space of reality has no conceivable features or attributes,
kyemé ngang lé kyewé chotrul tön
Yet, out of this state beyond arising, the display of arising magically unfolds,
shyi dang tro chak natsok rab gyur ma
And you take on various manifestations, both peaceful and wrathful—
ming gya tsen tong ma la töpar gyi
To you, mother of a hundred names and thousand attributes, I offer praise.

lhamo parna shawa ri dang ni
You who manifest as the goddess Parṇaśavarī,
gau ri gyé sok namgyur chiryang char
As the eight Gaurī, and in various other forms—
si sum wanggyur dorjé trulmo ché
Great vajra enchantress, mistress of the three realms,
palden ying kyi gyalmor chaktsal tö
Glorious Queen of Space, to you I offer homage and praise.

nangsi jung chen ngapö rangshyin ni
Magnificent Goddess whose nature is that of the five elements
sa nyen dro dang kyö jé daknyi ché
Of appearance and existence—steady, fluid, warm and agile,
dü shyi paldzin namkhé göchen ma
Bearer of the splendour of the four times, lady cloaked in space,
khordé kyewé yumchen ma la tö
Great Mother from whom saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are born, to you I offer praise.

dorjé tsünmö chukyé gyepé ü
In the heart of the Vajra Queen’s blossoming lotus
rabjam kyilkhor til gyi gongbu shyin
Infinite maṇḍalas abide forever, like heaps of sesame seeds,
taktu shyukpé womin sangwa cher
And in the great and mysterious Akaniṣṭha,
sang dzin wangmo naljorma pal tö
You are the powerful yoginī, keeper of secrets—to you I offer praise.

ngowo rangshyin mé ching dak tok pang
Without essence or nature and transcending any notion of self,
tröpé tsenma tamché nyershyi shying
You have entirely pacified the signs of conceptual elaboration
ösal nampa kün gyi chokden ma
And are endowed with luminosity, the supreme of all aspects—
sherab parol chin mé ngowor tö
To you, the very essence of Prajñāpāramitā, I offer praise.

tongpé ying lé zuk kyi kur shyengpa
Out of empty basic space, you arise in your kāya of form
longchö yongdzok deshyin shek ma nga
As the five female buddhas of perfect enjoyment,
sa dang parol chin chü tsemor chin
At the pinnacle of the ten stages and transcendent perfections—
palden rangjung gyalmor chaktsal tö
Glorious self-arisen queen, to you I offer homage and praise.

heruka dang drekpé lhachen sok
Together with Heruka, haughty Mahādeva and others,
chik tu ma ngé tab chen nam mang dang
Various different partners of great skilful methods,
khajor shyi yi roltsé tön dzé ma
You demonstrate the play of fourfold union—
gyutrul lhamo chenmor chaktsal tö
Great goddess of illusion, to you I offer homage and praise.

dzakpé drima tamché nam pang shing
To you who fully possess the qualities of nectar
zakmé dewa chok gi longchö kyi
From the rabbit-bearing moon of the syllable Haṃ
taktu nyö shing hang yik ribong gi
And constantly savour the supreme undefiled bliss
dütsi cha yi yongsu gangla tö
In which any fault of emission is absent, I offer praise.

mikmé nyingjé kyendro tamché la
You who have non-referential compassion for all beings
ma chik bu la tsé shyin taktu dung
And care for them constantly with motherly love.
jampa chenpö chen gyi zik dzepa
You who look upon them with eyes of deep loving kindness—
ma chik changchub sem ma chenmor tö
Sole mother, great bodhisattva, to you I offer praise.

dü sum küntu ngöndro jesu juk
You who course throughout ages past, present and future,
dü shyi künkhyab nöchü cha chenmo
Pervading the four times as prosperity in lands and beings;
trulpé zuk ni duma mangpor tön
You who display countless forms of emanation
gyün michepé drowa dul la tö
And train beings continuously—to you I offer praise.

ying la né kyang shyiwé tar ma lhung
You who abide in basic space without lapsing into the quiescent extreme,
sipar jesu chakpé gyu tab kyi
And through illusory means engage passionately in conditioned existence;
namyang gokpa mepé trinlé ni
You who display enlightened activity that will never come to an end
khorwa né kyi bardu tön la dü
But continue for as long as saṃsāra itself endures—to you I bow down.

lha la wanggyur lhamo namdru ma
With dominion over the devas, you are the goddess Revatī,
lu la wanggyur lumo dungkyong ma
With dominion over the nāgas, you are the nāginī Śaṅkhapālī,
sinpö chungma bö drok gyalmo ché
And as a consort among the rākṣasas, you are Rāvaṇa’s great queen—
khandrö tsomo jé la chaktsal tö
Sovereign lady of the ḍākinīs, to you I offer homage and praise.

sang ngak gyüdé kün gyi nyer dzinma
Custodian of all the classes of tantra and secret mantra,
womin durtrö meri barwa ru
In the Blazing Volcano Charnel Ground of Akaniṣṭha,
ka yi sungma tromo rakdong ma
You are the guardian of the Word, the copper-faced lady of wrath,
sishyi dra lé namgyalma la tö
Subduer of foes throughout existence and peace—to you I offer praise.

ré ma dza dzi dzu dang rabten ma
Remajā, Remajī, Remajū2 and Rabtenma,
mak dang zor gyi lé dzé drakmo gyal
Makzor Gyalmo, the wrathful queen of martial and sorcerous rites,
dorjé shok gö sokdrub ma lasok
Together with Dorje Shokgöma, Sokdrupma and the rest—
tensung dumar trul la chaktsal tö
To you who manifest as these various guardians of the teachings, I offer homage and praise.

khyö kyi jé drang kong sin balang dong
To all your followers too, the ox-faced Kongsin,
drok sin chusin dong dang dré dong sok
Makara-faced Droksin, and bear-faced Bamsin,
shyen yang nakmo jewa bum dé tsok
As well as the legions of nakmo goddesses
lung nak tsubmar khyil la rabtu tö
Who teem in a darkening tempest, I offer praise.

tong kham di na drakstal tumo ché
Lady of wrath and power in this thousandfold realm,
tobshuk kalpé mé shyin rab bar ma
You who blaze intensely with the power of apocalyptic fire,
tensung kün la wanggyur chenmo ni
Magnificent controller of all guardians of the teachings,
palden dökham lhamo khyö la tö
Glorious Goddess of the Desire Realm, to you I offer praise.

ma tar jam dang sing tar rab dung shying
You who have a mother’s love and sister’s ardent care,
naljor drubpé drokmo chenmo ni
You who are a great support to practitioners of yoga,
changchub bar gyi dzamor ngasol shying
I take you as my dear companion until enlightenment,
mindral dangwé sem kyi töpar gyi
And, in sincere hope that we may never part, I offer praise.

detar töpé yang kyi rolmo di
Through the sweet music of these words of praise,
remati yi tukdam nyenpo kang
May the exacting demands of Rematī be fulfilled.
galtrul nyamchak tamché zö shyé la
Please forgive all errors, confusions, impairments and breakages,
tsangpa chok gi ngödrub tsal du sol
And grant the attainment of supreme and total purification.

jikten jikten depé ngöpo kün
All the riches of this world and that which lies beyond
lo yi lang té dökham dakmor bul
I take up in my mind and offer to you, Mistress of the Desire Realm.
khyö tuk gyepa chenpo rab kyé dé
May this bring you immense joy and delight,
nam shyi trinlé malü drubpar dzö
And may you carry out all four types of activity.

künkhyen nyimé nyen gyi tenpa dang
May the teaching of the omniscient Kinsman of the Sun3 and those who uphold it spread far and
wide.
tendzin dé gyé lungtok shedrub pel
May the teaching and practice of the Dharma of scripture and realization flourish.
chöden gyalpo jindak upang to
May Dharma-endowed rulers and patrons gain ever higher status and glory.
nakchok der ché tsené jom gyur chik
And may all forces of darkness be eradicated entirely!

naljor dakchak yönchö khor ché la
For us yogis, our patrons and all those around us,
nöpar jepé zukchen zukmé tsok
May any doers of harm, whether they be embodied or immaterial,
shyi dang gyé dang wang gi lé sum gyi
Be tamed through the threefold activity of pacifying, enriching and magnetizing,
jampé sem dang denpé trinlé dzö
So that they carry out enlightened action with minds of love.

shyiwé mi dul dang sem denpa nam
May those who bear hostility and are untameable through peaceful means
dong kam mé la gyabpa jishyin du
Be thoroughly annihilated, like tinder that is put to the flames,
ming dang rü dang gyüpar chepa nam
So that their personal and family identity and descendants are no more,
ming tsam mepa dul du lakpar dzö
And nothing, not even so much as their names, remains.

dorna gang sam chir nang tamché pa
In short, may all that I conceive of and perceive
rang gi sem kyi cho rol nyi du shar
Arise as the magical manifestation of my own mind,
ying kyi gyalmo ekadzati ru
And by recognizing it with certainty as Ekajaṭī, Queen of Space,
ngoshé takchö tiklé nyakchik long
May enlightened activity be spontaneously and effortlessly accomplished
jatsol dralwé trinlé lhündrub dzö
Within the expanse of reality’s single, all-encompassing sphere.

Thus, in Kolkata, the Indian city of the glorious goddess, I, Traktung Pawo Pema Yeshe Dorje,
wrote down whatever came to mind.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020, with the kind assistance of Khenpo Yeshe Gyaltsen and Sean
Price.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "dpal kA lI de wir bstod pa dpal lha dgyes pa'i dbyangs
snyan/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang,
2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 10: 373–377
↑ The Bir 2012 edition mistakenly reads kun tu bzang por in place of kun tu bzang mor.↑ Together
with Rematī, these three goddesses belong to the guardians of Kīla as a group known as
the four mahātmadevī (bdag nyid ma).↑ nyi ma’i gnyen. A common epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.