The Conquerors' Delight: In Praise of Śrāvastī

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti!Supreme god of gods, triumphant Lion of the Śākyas,Leader of men and foremost guide
for all the world,Your three kāyas are to be found throughout all realms,And, in taming
those of limited vision, you reign supreme!

Miraculous in your activity, in the mere blink of an eyeYou emanated and absorbed many hundred
formsHere, in this supreme of places known as Śrāvastī —To this, the Lord of Sages' garden
of delight, I pay homage!

Here the light of the assembled saṅgha in their saffron robesEmbraced the sky like fresh golden
clouds at dawn or dusk,In this great valley renowned as Jetavana — 'Jeta's grove' —Which
arose through the merit of the patron Anāthapiṇḍada.

Here, in this great paradise of the Dharma,The Lord of Sages, resplendent as a golden mountain,Displayed
great miracles that utterly vanquishedThe six elephant-like teachers, drunk on
their wrong views.As the sound of their wailing filled the entire world,You subdued and
humiliated all Māra's forces,And sounded the drum of Dharma a hundred times.

Thus, the wondrous account of your great miracles,Like nectar that gladdened the heart and delighted
the visionOf gods, human beings and all other witnesses,Will be forever told and
retold until the very ends of time.

To Śrāvastī, a place more exalted than any other,For more than five and twenty rainy seasons,You,
foremost of the two-legged, came and here you stayed —Now, recalling this again and
again, I pay homage!

Henceforth, throughout all my future lives,May I be cared for by the Guru, Lord of Sages,And
as I keep the discipline that delights the noble,May I be satisfied with Dharma, profound
and vast!

May the Omniscient Buddha's teaching and its holders flourish,May Dharma patrons live long and
their merit and resources increase!May the evil actions of asuras hostile to the doctrine
be pacified!And may the light of precious Dharma shine forever brightly!

Thus, I, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, wrote this during a pilgrimage to this holy place in the Fire
Monkey year (1956), when recalling the Teacher's life and liberation and feeling extremely
inspired.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey (with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and the kind
assistance of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche), 2018.