The Swift Infusion of Blessings
In Praise of Mañjughoṣa
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

dhih, khakhyab dangpö sangye jampal yang
Dhīḥ. Primordial buddha Mañjuśrīghoṣa, pervasive as the sky,
yeshe mik chik küntu drima mé
Your singular eye of pristine wisdom is entirely without flaws,
nampar dakpé tsenpé öbarwa
And you gleam with the light of the pure signs and marks—
ku chok gyalpo khyé la chaktsal tö
To the king of supreme body, I offer homage and praise.

tsang yang dakmé sengé dra dangden
With your voice of Brahma and selfless leonine roar,
mutek ridak küntu trak dzöpa
You strike fear into the wild beasts of the tīrthikas.
jömé jöpa kün gyi shyir gyurpa
Inexpressible, you are the basis of all expression—
sung chok jampé yang la chaktsal tö
To the ‘Gentle Melody’ of supreme speech, I offer homage and praise.

yangdak ta dang deshyin nyi kyi dak
Master of the limits of the authentic and reality as such,
rangjung yeshe döndam chö kyi ku
The ultimate dharmakāya of naturally arisen wisdom,
zab shyi trödral ösal dümajé
Profound peace beyond complexity, luminous and unconditioned—
tuk chok jampé dorjér chaktsal tö
To Mañjuvajra of supreme mind, I offer homage and praise.

deshyin shekpa kün gyi wangchuk ché
Great and mighty lord of all the thus-gone buddhas,
yönten mizé gyatsö ter chenpo
Vast store of inexhaustible, ocean-like qualities,
dü sum gyalwa tamché kyepé yab
Forefather to all the victorious ones of the three times—
yönten chok nga khyé la chaktsal tö
To you, possessor of supreme qualities, I offer homage and praise.

yishyin norbu paksam shing shyindu
Just like a wish-granting gem or a wish-fulfilling tree,
namkhé talé drowa matongwar
To the farthest reaches of space, as long as beings remain,
desi dzepa trinlé gyün mi ché
Your enlightened activity continues without interruption—
trinlé chok nga khyé la chaktsal tö
To you whose activity is supreme, I offer homage and praise.

detar töpé jampal yeshe sem
Through praising you, wisdom-being Mañjuśrī, in this way,
nying gi zé'u drur gyepar tak shyuk né
May you remain forever gladly upon the lotus of my heart,
marik münsel yeshe tsa gojé
Banish ignorance’s darkness, open the channels to wisdom,
lo chok pobpé ter gyé tsal du sol
And grant the eight treasures of eloquence and supreme intellect.1

om ara pa tsana dhih
Oṃ arapacana dhīḥ.

Thus, at the request of the third incarnation of Samten Choktrul,2 the noble nephew of the all-knowing
Chökyi Jungné, I, Chökyi Lodrö, wrote this in the garden of Yiga Chödzin (Joyous
Upholding of Dharma) at Palpung.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "''jam dbyangs bstod pa byin rlabs myur 'jug/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 2: 389–390
↑ The eight treasures of courageous eloquence are: 1) treasure of recollection; 2) treasure
of intelligence; 3) treasure of realization; 4) treasure of retention (dhāraṇī); 5) treasure
of courageous eloquence; 6) treasure of Dharma; 7) treasure of bodhicitta; 8) treasure
of accomplishment.↑ i.e., the Third Palpung Öntrul.