The Flower of Faith

Praise to the Great Lord Guru Tsongkhapa

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru mañjuśrīye!

I bow down before the wish-fulfilling tree of bodhicitta,Which you planted many aeons ago and
is now vast,Heavily laden with the fruit of benefit and joy,To shelter beings of this final,
five-hundred-year age of degeneration.

You swallowed an entire ocean of infinite learningAnd pursued the sun and moon of knowledge
and love,Resplendent like a golden mountain of accumulated merit,Embellishment of this snowy
land, second buddha, to you I bow.

The orange bearer of the sword[1] lies hidden in your heart,The queen of eloquence herself[2]
is wedded to your throat,And the lord of secrets[3] granted you a secret treasury of mantra—Precious
guru Lobzang Drakpa, you reign supreme!

You conferred directly with Mañjughoṣa,Vajrapāṇi saved you from the ravine of doubt,And you
beheld infinite bliss-gone buddhas in visions—All knowing one, glorious in renown, to you
I bow.

The jewelled mountain of your superior ethical disciplineIs beautifully capped by the four terraces
of absorptionAnd the universal victory palace of your perfect insight—Great turner
of the wheel of Dharma, to you I bow.

You hoisted the flag of the Buddhist teachings in this age of strife,The great conch of your
fame resounded to the far reaches of the ocean,And you planted the banner of victory for
the teachings at existence’s peak—Incomparable king of Dharma, to you I bow.

Upholders of your golden tradition thronged this world of ours,With unassailable confidence
in exposition, debate and composition—To this magnificent succession, which rivals in its
resplendenceThe fabulous riches of Vaiśravaṇa himself, I bow.

With the mind of awakening and your conduct spotlessly pure,You banished the darkness of eternalist
and nihilist views,And revealed the reality of the profound Middle Way—To you, glorious
Nāgārjuna in person, I bow.

You unlocked the hidden treasures of Vajradhara’s secret tantrasAnd, through fully absorbing
their profound meaning,Reached the exalted state of an accomplished vidyādhara—All-pervasive
lord, mighty Vajra Holder, to you I bow.

In the presence of the great Maitreya in Tuṣita heaven,You are the bodhisattva renowned as Mañjugarbha,Teaching
the Dharma amidst an ocean of buddha’s heirs—Supremely great guide to
gods and humans alike, to you I bow.

From this moment on, throughout all my lives to come,May this sublime precious master’s feet
grace the lotus at my crown,And may he inspire me to perfect the strength of unimpeded intelligenceAnd
act always in service of the teachings of the Victorious Ones!

Thus, Chökyi Lodrö wrote this with devotion extending to the tips of his fingers on the third
‘joy’ of the waxing phase of the Month of Miracles during the female Earth Pig year (1959),
based on a delusory dream of filling a cubit-sized medicinal statue of the precious guru
with dhāraṇī. May virtue and excellence ensue!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.