The Hero's Bellowing Laughter
In Praise of the Lord of Yogins
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru virūpa-pādāya!

soktsol dhuti ying su chingwa lé
Through binding wind-energy within the space of dhūti,
pomé dechen chakgyé kur shyengpa
You arose in the form of the mudrā of changeless great bliss.
dorjé nyima heruka pal ni
You are the glorious heruka Vajra Sun,
naljor wangchuk barwé kur tönpa
Displaying the form of a resplendent Lord of Yogins.
khordé chö kün khorlo dompé ying
With all the phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa in the space of Cakrasaṃvara,
nang gi sa chok tsuk tor tsemor drö
You reached the peak of the jewelled crest, the supreme inner stage,
heruka pal gyé dzé dorjé ku
The supreme heruka, the vajra form of Hevajra.
bar yo jé chak gar gyé rolwa yi
Through a hundred moods of passionate blaze and movement,
sa sum khyab dzé ha hé gegyang drok
You pervade the three realms, bellowing with laughter: 'Ha! Ha!'
dé dang tongpa miché ösal tuk
Your mind of clear light in which bliss and emptiness are indivisible,
dribdral shintu nampar dakpa ni
Is free from obscuration and exceedingly pure;
ngö nam malü kün la yongsu khyab
It extends everywhere, encompasses every entity.
demchok dorjé sempé palyön ni
With your glorious qualities of the vajra being of Supreme Bliss,
kha dang nyampé trinlé tak trowa
Your activity, as vast as space, extends forever.
naljor wangchuk chenpor solwa deb
Great lord of yogins, to you I pray!
jikme heruka pal chok tob shok
May I attain the supreme splendour of the fearless heruka!

Thus, Jigdral Pawo spoke this words and Akṣara Maṅgala1 put them into writing.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2019.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rnal 'byor dbang phyug la bstod pa dgyes mdzad dpa'
bo'i gad rgyangs/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse
Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 2: 713
↑ i.e., Drungyik Tsering Tashi, Jamyang Khyentse's scribe and calligrapher.