The Sun that Causes the Lotus of Intelligence to Bloom
In Praise of the Lineage of Gurus for the Noble Abhidharma
by Rongtön Sheja Kunrig

lama dang lhakpé lha la chaktsal lo
Homage to the guru and supreme deity.

chö kyi ku lé yowa mé kyang té
Although you do not move from the dharmakāya,
natsok shying du trulpé kur tön ching
You display nirmāṇakāya forms in manifold realms,
trinlé özer chok chur rab tröpé
And through emitting the light rays of activity in all directions,
drowé dönjé tubwang shyab la dü
Accomplish the welfare of beings—to the Lord of Sages, I bow.

yangdak nangwé marik mün selwa
An authentic light to dispel the darkness of ignorance
gyalwé sungpa damchö ngönpé do
Was the Abhidharma teaching given by the victorious one,
chok tu sal dzé tokmé yiknyen sok
Excellently illuminated by Asaṅga, Vasubandhu and the rest—
chö ngön mawé nyima dé la dü
To these suns of Abhidharma discourse, I bow.

jampal yang kyi khyen rab dzin jépa
The holders of the wisdom of Mañjuśrīghoṣa—
gyalpö sé dang lobpön gangwa pel
Jinaputra1 and Ācārya Pūrṇavardhana2
né kyi drönmé dzepé khyen rabchen
And the one with the wisdom to create the Torch of Crucial Points,3
shyenyang chö ngön mawa nam la dü
To these exponents of Abhidharma, I bow.

gangri trö dir chö ngön gyé dzepa
Those who spread the Abhidharma in this land of snowy peaks,
chö kyi tsöndrü yeshe jungné dang
Chökyi Tsöndrü,4 Yeshe Jungne,5
drang ti darma nyingpo la sokpa
Drangti Darma Nyingpo and the rest—
mawé sengé khepé tsok la dü
To these learned lions of speech, I bow.

khorwa kyé dzé nyönmong duk sum té
The three poisons are afflictions that create saṃsāra,
tsawa marik yongsu pong dzepa
And ignorance, their root, is to be entirely eliminated.
sherab labpa gyü la wangwa té
With mastery of the wisdom training in our minds,
nyönmong dra lé nampar gyal gyur chik
May we conquer the enemy of the afflictions.

chö ngön mawa güpé rab töpé
Through the virtue of devotedly praising these exponents of Abhidharma,
gé tsok gang gi marik mün sal té
May the darkness of ignorance be dispelled,
lodrö nangwa künné gyé gyurpa
As the light of intelligence extends far and wide,
tamché khyenpé gopang tob gyur chik
And may we attain the level of omniscience!

The great Rongtön composed this praise of the lineage of noble Abhidharma at glorious Nālendra.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.

Source: shes bya kun rig. "mngon pa'i bla brgyud la bstod pa blo gros kyi pad+mo rgyas par byed
pa'i nyi ma." In gsung 'bum/ shes bya kun rig. TBRC W1PD83960. 1: 296 - 297. khren tu'u:
si khron dpe skrun tshogs pa/ si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2008. http://tbrc.org/link?RID=O1PD94165|O1PD941651KG60761$W1PD83960
↑ Author of Abhidharmasamuccayabhāṣya.↑ Author of Abhidharmakośaṭīkālakṣanānusāriṇī.↑ i.e.,
Dignāga who composed the Torch of Crucial Points (Abhidharmavṛttimarmadīpa) a commentary on
Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakośa.↑ i.e., Rok Chökyi Tsöndrü.↑ i.e., Gowo Yeshe Jungne.