The Purifier of Ethical Discipline
An Aspirational Praise to Vajradhara Kunga Zangpo
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

om swati
Oṃ svasti!
tönpa nyammé shakyé gyalpo yi
In the true prophetic speech of the peerless Teacher, king of Śākyas,
den sung lung gi ngakpé metok tor
You were lavished with bouquets of praise.
nyikdü tubwang nyipa kün ga zang
Kunga Zangpo, second lord of sages for this degenerate age,
gang gi namtar dren shyin güpé tö
As I recall your life of liberation, I devotedly offer praise.

jangchok gangri jong dir do dang ngak
Unrivalled in your flawless exposition
manor jishyin ché la drenda dral
Of sūtra and mantra throughout this northern land of snows.
dom sum namdak lob tsok ser ri treng
Pure in the threefold vows, your disciples like a chain of golden mountains,
nordzin khyön kün yongsu khyab la dü
Extended throughout the whole wealth–bearing world—to you I bow.

kyé dang dzokpé naljor zabmo yi
Through the profound yogas of generation and perfection,
rangdön chökü gyalsa ngön du nyé
You attained the kingdom of dharmakāya for your own benefit,
shyendön trinlé namkhé tar khyabpa
And your activity for others’ welfare extended to the limits of space—
jetsün éwampa la güpé tö
Noble and reverend Evaṃpa, to you I devotedly offer praise.

khyenpé yeshe jampal pawo dang
In your knowing wisdom, you were the valiant Mañjuśrī,
tsewa lak na pekar changwa ngö
In your love, the holder of the white lotus in person,1
nüpa gyü kün dü dzé dorjé dzin
And in your capacity, the vajra-wielding compiler of tantras—2
yermé palden lamar güpé tö
To the glorious guru, indivisible from these, I devotedly offer praise.

tsultrim tsang shying tachö nampar dak
With pure ethical discipline and pristine view and conduct,
zung dang tingdzin yönten gyatso nyé
You gained oceanic qualities of dhāraṇī and samādhi,
wang shyi chuwo duljé shyingsar beb
And brought a river of fourfold empowerment to fields of disciples.
min ching drolwar dzé la töpar gyi
To you, the producer of ripening and liberation, I offer praise.

detar mejung gü dü drakpo yi
Through the inspiration and blessings of this praise and prayer to you
tö ching solwa debpé jinlab kyi
Combined with fervent and wondrous acts of obeisance,
namkhé ta tuk tayé drowa nam
May the infinite beings who extend to the limits of space
dukngal lé drol changchub tobpar shok
All be liberated from suffering and attain awakening!

khyepar dak sok khyö kyi jejuk nam
For me and all your other followers in particular,
go sum bakmé nyechö lé dom shying
May we resist heedless, negative acts of body, speech and mind,
ngejung tsultrim khang zang nyamgawar
Enter the delightful mansion of discipline and renunciation,
shyuk né changchub sem chok kyewar shok
And arouse the supreme mind set upon awakening!

dorjé tekpé tsul la rabné té
Fully established in the ways of Vajrayāṇa,
dom dang damtsik nampar dakpa dang
With vows and samaya utterly pure,
rim nyi lam gyi dröpa tarchin té
May I follow the paths of the two stages to the very end
dorjé dzin gyal ngön du gyurwar shok
And actualize the state of the victorious Vajradhara!

deng né zung té tserab tamché du
From now on, throughout all my lives to come,
gyalwa nyipa rik kyi dakpor tob
May this second conqueror be the lord of my family,
sung sang dütsi chü kyi tsowa dang
May I be sustained by the nectar of his secret speech,
pang tok tarchin dön nyi lhündrub shok
And, having perfected abandonment and realization, may I spontaneously accomplish the twofold
benefit!

Thus, Chökyi Lodrö, who possesses a mind of unshakeable faith and devotion, wrote this on the
eighth day of the month of Pūrvabhādrapada (Alpha Pegasi). May it become a cause for the
noble and reverend guru’s blessings to enter the heart.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “rdo rje 'chang kun dga' bzang po'i bstod pa/” in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 3: 161–162
↑ I.e., Avalokiteśvara
↑ I.e., Vajrapāṇi