The Lute of Vajra Harmony

Praise to the Protector Mañjuśrī

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti!Glorious buddha, immaculate in your splendour,Who universally radiates beams of wisdom
light,And whose captivating uṣṇīṣa defies perception—Mañjughoṣa, original buddha, to
you I pay homage.

The radiant glow of a fresh new dawnPermeates and fills the whole of space,As the Tathāgata
together with his heirsDisplays the wondrous dance of delight.

The array of your form extends to every realm.Your speech transcends yet underlies all expression.Your
mind is the eternal knot, profound and secret,Its nature difficult to fathom, deep
and subtle.

You thoroughly infuse the minds of all the victors.Your qualities, freed and ripened, are unimaginable.Outside
your wisdom treasury and similar spheres,Other exertions are like searches
for the sky’s ends.

The ornamental play of your unceasing activity,Which does not fluctuate throughout past, present
and future,Is an endless treasure—enduring, pervasive and spontaneous,A ground that sustains
all sentient beings throughout space.

Emaho!Protector Mañjughoṣa, marvellous and magnificent,Although you are the father who begets
all buddhas,You do not age or decline but maintain your youth.Supreme vajra bestower, pinnacle
of reality, I bow before you.[1]

Even within the most minute of tiny particlesLie oceanic realms with teachers and studentsTo
whom you impart oceans of definitive Dharma—Inconceivable mystery, in devotion I praise you.


Through the pristine virtue of offering praise in this way,May delusion’s darkness in beings’
minds be dispelled,May the wisdom that knows nature and extent unfold,And may everyone attain
the supreme level of Mañjuśrī!

Thus, at the request of the shrine-master Chokden, who supplied the necessary writing materials,
Jampal Gawé Gocha instantaneously transcribed—through the playful dance of his fingers—whatever
came to mind while relaxing in a forest in Darjeeling. May virtue abound!

| Translated by by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.