The Light of Wisdom

Praise to Mañjuśrī

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo mañjuśriye!

I bow to Mañjuśrī, the buddha before all buddhas,Possessor of the single unblemished eye of
wisdom,Who penetrates to the core of the subtlest particles,Master of the animate and inanimate,
existence and peace.

I bow to the one who is a parent to all beings,The father who begets all the noble śrāvakas,Pratyekabuddhas,
bodhisattvas and buddhas,And who has a wisdom body and displays youthfulness.


I bow to the one whose single body is as vast as space,Whose single voice reaches throughout
saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,Whose single mind is the self-arisen wisdom deity Mānjuśrī,And who constitutes
the life-force of all beings.

In nature and extent, the victorious ones and their heirsAre none other than emanations of Mañjuśrī
himself;There is not so much as a particle that is otherwise.I bow to your infinite
three secrets, vast and profound.

Sometimes you are at the centre and sometimes in the retinueOf the inconceivable maṇḍalas of
peaceful and wrathful deities.Yet whatever manifestations appear, be they lesser or supreme,All
are Mañjuśrī’s display—to which I bow.

As millions upon millions of light rays stream forthFrom the limitless play of your form and
your mantra,They purify the ordinary world and inhabitants into suchness.To the one who manifests
as the nature of clear light, I bow.

For all those haunted by the darkness of delusionEven a partial vision of your enlightened formOr
contact with the blessed king of vidyā mantrasIs enough to bestow supreme intelligence—to
you I bow.

To you whose terrifying red and black forms as a wrathful kingDestroy the malicious and unruly
arrogant spirits,The mind’s three poisons that have evolved into rudras,Like a blaze consuming
hay and straw, I bow.

To Mañjuśrī, who is the great web of illusion;To Mañjuśrī, who timelessly abides in the three
times,And for whom coming and remaining are mere verbal elaboration;To Vajra Mañjuśrī, the
equality of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, I bow.

Through this praise, may the sun of MañjuśrīCause the lotus of our intelligence to bloom,So
we may apply correct fourfold understandingTo the teachings of the Tathāgatas in their entirety.


Throughout our lives, may we always be guidedBy the Mañjughoṣa guru along the path to liberation.May
we perfect the oceanic conduct of the bodhisattvasAnd awaken into the nature of Mañjuśrī’s
four kāyas.

Thus, Jampal Gawé Gocha wrote this on the morning of the twenty-third day of the eleventh month
in the Water Dragon year during a Drolö recitation retreat.

| Translated by by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.