The Praise to Mañjuśrī: Glorious Wisdom’s Excellent Qualities
attributed to Vajrāyudha/Vajraśastra

In the language of India: śrī jñāna guṇa bhadra nāma stuti
In the language of Tibet: dpal ye shes yon tan bzang po zhes bya ba’i bstod pa
chomden dé jampé yang la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Lord Mañjughoṣa!
gang gi lodrö drib nyi trindral nyi tar namdak rabsalwé
Your wisdom is brilliant and pure like the sun, free from the clouds of the two obscurations.
jinyé dön kün jishyin zik chir nyi kyi tukkar lekbam dzin
You perceive the whole of reality, exactly as it is, and so hold the book of Transcendental
Wisdom at your heart.
gangdak sipé tsönrar marik mün tum dukngal gyi zirwé
You look upon all beings imprisoned within saṃsāra, enshrouded by the thick darkness of ignorance
and tormented by suffering,
dro tsok kün la bu chik tar tsé yenlak drukchü yangden sung
With the love of a mother for her only child. Your enlightened speech, endowed with sixty melodious
tones,
druk tar cher drok nyönmong nyi long lé kyi chak drok droldzé ching
Like the thundering roar of a dragon, awakens us from the sleep of destructive emotions and
frees us from the chains of karma.
marik münsel dukngal nyugu jinyé chödzé raldri nam
Dispelling the darkness of ignorance, you wield the sword of wisdom to cut through all our suffering.
döné dak ching sa chü tar sön yönten lü dzok gyalsé tuwö ku
Pure from the very beginning, you have reached the end of the ten bhūmis and perfected all enlightened
qualities. Foremost of the Buddha’s heirs,
chu trak chu dang chunyi gyen tré dak lö münsel jampé yang la dü
Your body is adorned with the hundred and twelve marks of enlightenment. To Mañjughoṣa, the
‘Gentle-voiced’, I prostrate, and pray: dispel the darkness from my mind!
Anyone, who recites this aloud once, seven times, twenty-one times, one hundred times or one
thousand or more times a day with a completely pure motivation will gradually purify the
obscurations, and will gain immeasurable qualities, such as remembering one’s studies with
confidence and unfailing retention, and the power and strength of wisdom through which one
can defeat opponents in debate.
Anyone who offers praise in this way three times a day will gain the qualities just mentioned
and will develop wisdom and compassion, gradually progressing along the paths and stages,
gaining ever greater qualities before swiftly reaching the citadel of omniscience and becoming
a great guide to liberate all beings from saṃsāra.

This completes the praise entitled ‘The Splendour of Wisdom’s Excellent Qualities’ composed
by Vajrāyudha/Vajraśastra. It was translated by Ngok Lotsawa.

| Rigpa Translations, 2011