The Praise to Tārā with Twenty-One Verses of Homage, and the Excellent Benefits of Reciting
the Praise
from the Words of the Buddha

In the language of India: Namas-tāraika-viṃśati-stotra-guṇa-hita-sahita
In the language of Tibet: Drolma la chak tsal nyishu tsa chik gi töpa penyön dang chepa (sgrol
ma la phyag ‘tshal nyi shu rtsa gcig gis bstod pa phan yon dang bcas pa)
In the English language: The Praise to Tārā with Twenty-One Verses of Homage and the Excellent
Benefits of Reciting the Praise

om jetsünma pakma drolma la chaktsal lo
Oṃ. Homage to the noble lady Tārā!

chaktsal taré nyurma pamo
Homage to Tārā, swift and gallant,
tuttara yi jikpa selma
Homage to Tuttārā, who banishes fear,
turé dön kün jinpé drolma
Homage to Turā, who fulfils every need,
sa hé yigé khyö la dü do
With svāhā we offer you honor and praise!1

chaktsal drolma nyurma pamo
Homage to Tārā, swift and gallant,
chen ni kechik lok dang dra ma
Whose glance flashes like flares of lightning;
jikten sum gön chukyé shyal gyi
Born on the heart of a blossoming lotus
gesar jewa lé ni jung ma
That rose from the tears of the Triple-World’s Lord. (1)

chaktsal tönké dawa küntu
Homage to you whose countenance is
gangwa gya ni tsekpé shyal ma
A hundred full moons gathered in autumn,
karma tongtrak tsokpa nam kyi
Smiling and glowing with brilliant radiance,
rabtu chewé ö rab bar ma
Like a thousand stars clustered, ablaze. (2)

chaktsal ser ngo chu né kyé kyi
Homage, golden lady, your lotus-hand
pemé chak ni nampar gyen ma
Is graced with a blue water-born flower.
jinpa tsöndrü katub shyiwa
You embody generosity, diligence, endurance,
zöpa samten chöyul nyi ma
Serenity, patience and meditation. (3)

chaktsal deshyin shekpé tsuktor
Homage to you, whose victories are endless,
tayé nampar gyalwa chö ma
Jewel on the great Tathāgata’s crown.
malü parol chinpa tobpé
You are well served by the heirs of the Victors,
gyalwé sé kyi shintu ten ma
Those who’ve accomplished all the perfections. (4)

chaktsal tuttara hung yigé
Homage to you, who with tuttāra and hūṃ
dö dang chok dang namkha gang ma
Fill desire realms unto the ends of space.
jikten dünpo shyab kyi nen té
You trample underfoot the seven worlds,
lüpa mepar gukpar nü ma
And have the strength to summon all. (5)

chaktsal gyajin melha tsangpa
Homage to you, praised by Indra,
lunglha natsok wangchuk chö ma
Agni, Brahmā, Maruts,2 and Śiva.
jungpo rolang driza nam dang
All the hosts of bhūtas, vetālas,
nöjin tsok kyi dün né tö ma
Gandharvas and yakṣas pay tribute to you. (6)

chaktsal tré cheja dang pé kyi
Homage to you, who with traṭ and phaṭ
parol trulkhor rabtu jom ma
Crush the enemies’ yantras3 to dust.
yé kum yön kyang shyab kyi nen té
With right leg bent in and left leg extended,
mebar trukpa shintu bar ma
Shining you tread amidst flames wildly blazing. (7)

chaktsal turé jikpa chenpö
Homage to Ture, the fearsome lady,
dü kyi pawo nampar jom ma
Destroyer of the most powerful demons.
chukyé shyal ni tronyer den dzé
With a lotus-face and a deep-furrowed brow,
drawo tamché malü sö ma
You are the slayer of each and every foe. (8)

chaktsal könchok sum tsön chakgyé
Homage to you, whose fingers grace
sormö tukkar nampar gyen ma
Your heart and display the Three Jewels mudrā.
malü chok kyi khorlö gyenpé
You’re graced by wheels adorning every direction,
rang gi ö kyi tsok nam truk ma
With dazzling radiance that overwhelms all.4 (9)

chaktsal rabtu gawa jipé
Homage to you, supremely joyous,
ugyen ö kyi trengwa pelma
Your splendorous crown spreading garlands of light.
shyepa rab shyé tuttara yi
Smiling and laughing, with tuttāre
dü dang jikten wang du dzé ma
You bring demons and worlds under control. (10)

chaktsal sa shyi kyongwé tsok nam
Homage to you, who can summon
tamché gukpar nüpa nyi ma
The hosts of earthly guardians.
tronyer yowé yigé hung gi
Your frown it quivers, and the syllable hūṃ
pongpa tamché nampar drolma
Delivers us all from every misfortune. (11)

chaktsal dawé dumbü ugyen
Homage to you, so brightly adorned,
gyenpa tamché shintu bar ma
With a sliver of moon as your crown,5
ralpé trö na öpakmé lé
Your locks are graced by Amitābha,
takpar shintu ö rab dzé ma
Whose gleaming rays stream forever forth. (12)

chaktsal kalpa tamé mé tar
Homage to you, seated in a halo
barwé trengwé ü na né ma
Blazing with apocalyptic flames.
yé kyang yön kum künné kor gé
Your right leg stretched out and left bent inward,
dra yi pung ni nampar jom ma
Immersed in joy, you crush legions of foes. (13)

chaktsal sa shyi ngö la chak gi
Homage to you, who on the earth’s surface
til gyi nün ching shyab kyi dung ma
Strike your palms and stamp your feet;
tronyer chen dzé yigé hung gi
Your brow deeply furrowed, with hūṃ you smash
rimpa dünpo nam ni gem ma
The seven netherworlds to nothing but dust. (14)

chaktsal dé ma gé ma shyi ma
Homage to you, blissful, gracious and tranquil,
nya ngen dé shyi chöyul nyi ma
Whose domain is the peace of nirvāṇa.
soha om dang yangdak denpé
With oṃ and svāhā in perfect union,
dikpa chenpo jompa nyi ma
You lay to waste every terrible evil. (15)

chaktsal künné kor rabga bé
Homage to you, who, immersed in rapture,
dra yi lü ni rabtu gem ma
Shatters the bodies of all your foes.
yigé chupé ngak ni köpé
You manifest from the wisdom-syllable hūṃ,6
rigpa hung lé drölma nyi ma
And display each of your mantra’s ten syllables. (16)

chaktsal turé shyab ni dabpé
Homage to Ture, your feet stomping boldly,
hung gi nampé sabön nyi ma
Formed from the seed of the syllable hūṃ.
rirab mendara dang bikjé
The mountains of Meru, Mandara and Vindhya,
jikten sum nam yowa nyi ma
And all the three worlds, you cause them to quake. (17)

chaktsal lha yi tso yi nampé
Homage to you, who hold in your hand
ridak takchen chak na nam ma
A deer-marked moon like a divine lake.
tara nyi jö pé kyi yigé
With tāra twice and then with phaṭ,
duk nam malüpar ni selma
You totally cleanse all of the poisons. (18)

chaktsal lha yi tsok nam gyalpo
Homage to you, who is served by kings
lha dang mi'amchi yi ten ma
Of hosts divine, and of gods and kiṃnaras.7
künné gocha gawa ji kyi
Suited in armour of joy and splendour,
tsö dang milam ngenpa selma
You clear away nightmares, soothe away strife. (19)

chaktsal nyima dawa gyepé
Homage to you, whose eyes shine with lustre,
chen nyipo la ö rabsal ma
Bright with the fullness of sun and moon.
hara nyi jö tuttara yi
With twice-uttered hara and tuttāre
shintu drakpö rimné selma
You pacify the most intractable diseases. (20)

chaktsal denyi sum nam köpé
Homage to you, who have the power to free,
shyiwé tu dang yangdak den ma
You put forth the realities as a set of three.
dön dang rolang nöjin tsok nam
Supreme Ture, you completely destroy
jompa turé rab chok nyi ma
The hordes of grahas,8 vetālas,9 and yakṣas.10 (21)

tsawé ngak kyi töpa di dang
This Praise with the twenty-one verses of homage
chaktsalwa ni nyishu tsa chik
Is itself the root mantra.

The Excellent Benefits of the Praise
lhamo la gü yangdak denpé
The wise who recite these words in earnest,
loden gang gi rab dang jö dé
Filled with genuine devotion for this goddess, (22)

sö dang torang langpar jé né
At dusk, and also having risen at dawn,
drenpé mi jik tamché rab ter
With recollection, will be granted fearlessness;
dikpa tamché rabtu shyijé
They will utterly eliminate all misdeeds,
ngendro tamché jompa nyi do
And surmount all evil destinies. (23)

gyalwa jewa trak dün nam kyi
Seventy million victorious buddhas
nyurdu wang ni kurwar gyur la
Will swiftly confer empowerment upon them,
di lé chewa nyi ni tob ching
And they will attain greatness in this world,
sangye gopang tartuk der dro
And reach the ultimate state of buddhahood. (24)

dé yi duk ni drakpo chenpo
Even the most powerful and toxic poisons,
ten nepa am shyenyang drowa
Which derive from plants or living beings,
zöpa dang ni tungpa nyi kyang
Whether eaten or taken as a draught,
drenpé rabtu selwa nyi tob
Will be purged entirely by recalling this praise. (25)

dön dang rim dang duk gi zirwé
Reciting this two or three or seven times11
dukngal tsok ni nampar pang té
Will eliminate multitudes of suffering
semchen shyenpa nam la yang ngo
Brought about by spirits, pestilence, and poison—
nyi sum dün du ngönpar jö na
And this applies even to other beings as well. (26)

bu döpé ni bu tob gyur shying
Those who wish for progeny will bear them;
nor döpé ni nor nam nyi tob
Those who wish for riches will acquire them;
döpa tamché tobpar gyur la
Each and every wish will hereby be fulfilled,
gek nam mé ching sosor jom gyur
And obstacles, entirely vanquished, will be no more. (27)

This completes the Praise to Bhagavatī Tārā as spoken by the completely perfect Buddha.12

| Translated by Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (trans. Stefan Mang, Peter Woods, and Ryan Conlon,
ed. Libby Hogg) with the kind assistance of Adam Pearcey, 2019.

Version: 1.4-20211116
↑ In some traditions this four-line verse is added after the translator’s homage and before
the actual start of the Praise. The verse conjures Tārā by drawing upon the three epithets
that also form the core of her root mantra (oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā): Tārā (Deliverer),
Tuttārā (Savior) and Turā (Swift One). The verse is an explanation of Tārā’s root mantra
(oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā) and may represent a synopsis of the Praise that follows. Some
masters explain that this verse is dedicated to Green Tārā, who is considered Tārā’s principal
form yet is not included in the Praise. The origin of the verse remains unclear. It
may be traced back to a translation of Pang Lotsawa Lodrö Tenpa (dpang lo tsā ba blo gros
brtan pa, 1276–1342).↑ Maruts are the Vedic gods of wind.↑ The word yantra (’khrul ’khor)
designates an instrument or other type of mechanical device (esp. one used in warfare), or
a magic diagram. It is derived from the Sanskrit root √yam, “to control.” (For more information
on yantras, see Gudrun Bühnemann, “Maṇḍalas and Yantras,” in Knut A. Jacobsen (eds.),
Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. ii, (Leiden: Brill, 2010): 566–572.)↑ The last
two lines of this verse could be understood as: a) Tārā graces all points and bearings of
the compass, and b) Tārā bears the mark(s) of (a) thousand spoked wheel(s) on her hand(s and
feet), the first of the 32 major marks of a buddha.↑ Some editions read zla ba’i rtse mo,
lit. “lunar peak,” instead of zla ba’i dum bu, “a sliver of moon”.↑ The various Tibetan
editions read either sgrol ma or sgron ma. Based on this variant, Tibetan authors variously
interpret this line as “you manifest from” (sgrol ma) or “you shine with” (sgron ma) the
wisdom syllable hūṃ.↑ Kiṃnaras (mi’am ci) are a class of semi-divine beings known for their
musical skills, depicted as half-horse and half-human, or half-bird and half-human.↑ Grahas
(gdon) are a type of evil spirit known to exert a harmful influence on the human body
and mind. Grahas are closely associated with the planets and other astronomical bodies.↑
Vetālas (ro langs) are harmful spirit who haunts charnel grounds and can take possession
of corpses and reanimate them.↑ Yakṣas (gnod sbyin) are a class of semi-divine beings that
haunt or protect natural places and cities. They can be malevolent or benevolent, and are
known for bestowing wealth and worldly boons.↑ This instruction led to the tradition of reciting
the Praise first twice, then thrice, and finally seven times. We find this, for example,
in the Zabtik Drolchok (zab tig sgrol chog).↑ Please note that this colophon varies
across the various Tibetan versions. Here we are following the Degé Kangyur edition of the
Praise (T 438).