The Swift Infusion of Blessings

In Praise of the Mahāpaṇḍita Candragomin

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Homage to Mañjughoṣa!

In the forever peaceful dharmadhātu,You are already liberated and awakened,Yet still you appear
once again in this realmIn a wisdom form with knowledge and love.

The maṇḍala of your signs and marks is fully developed,Your speech resonates with the sixty
melodious tones,And your mind has the character of transcendent wisdom—Mañjughoṣa guru, I
bow down before you.

Opponent of ordinary substantial phenomena,Keeper of the treasury of sections of Dharma,One
whose identity is the definitive ultimate,To you who defy the imagination, I pay homage.

Your loving face glows like a hundred moonsAll full of compassion towards beingsAnd adorned
with the rabbit mark of bodhicitta—[1]To you who bestow the ambrosia of benefit and happiness,
I bow.

Your fine form with its pure, brahma-like conduct,[2]Which is entirely consistent and without
duplicity,Emits the sweet fragrance of ethical discipline—To you who are magnificent at
observing vows, I bow down.

You reside on an island amidst the ocean of learning,Are arrayed in the jewel ornaments of the
meditative,And possess the hood of scripture and reasoning—To you, a second Nāgārjuna,
I pay homage.

The three families and Tārā, your yidam deity,Appeared to you directly time and again,And you
discussed the profound and vast Dharma—To you who cut through the web of doubt, I bow.

Countless scholars of the noble landBowed down at your feet in reverenceAnd through a portion
of your teachingUnlocked the treasure of courageous eloquence—to you I bow.

You dispelled the wicked attacks of arrogant disputants,And raised aloft the umbrella of the
genuine teachings.Who else but you could count as the famous moonIn the sky of the profound
and vast Mahāyāna?

You beautified the three worldsWith the noble Asaṅga’s views and works.And as an immaculate,
day-making sun,Set out the path uniting view and conduct.

Your treatises with their excellent explanationsOf all outer and inner branches of knowledgeWill
remain as the unique vision of the learnedWithout ever fading, even until the aeon’s
end.

Fully trained in the path of the two stages,At the supreme level of no-further-training,You
are the all-pervasive, all-perfect dharmakāya—To you, the mighty Vajradhara, I bow.

As we who have faith in youPlay the many-stringed vīṇā of praise,And thereby delight your wisdom
mind,Grant us the light of intelligence, I pray.

From now until I attain awakening,As I follow you, my protector, without ever parting,Cause
the bright wisdom fire of twofold knowledgeTo burn through the thicket of the obscurations,
I pray.

Bring mastery in explanation, debate and composition,Cause me to find certainty in the authentic
view,Unlock a hundred doors to wondrous courage and eloquence,And grant me the attainment
of perfect victory over all.

These verses of praise and prayer to the great upāsaka and marvellous ācārya[3] Candra were
composed by one who was intrigued by his life story and inspired with faith, Shönnu Mañjughoṣa
Dharmamati. May virtue and goodness abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.