The Bestowal of Supreme Blessings
In Praise of the Vajradhara Loter Wangpo
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

om swasti
Oṃ svasti!
dorjé chang wang mi yi zuk dzin pa
Mighty Vajradhara appearing in human form,
kyilkhor gyatso trodü jepo chok
Supreme source for the emanation and absorption of oceanic maṇḍalas,
palden tenyo künkhyab sangwé dak
Glorious Lord of Secrets, pervading throughout the animate and inanimate world,
nying ü pekar shyepé zé'u drur dü
To the one upon the blossoming white lotus in the centre of my heart, I bow!

sangye kün gyi sangdzin wangpo ni
The mighty keeper of the secrets of all the buddhas
lak na dorjé marung dü dré shé
Is Vajrapāṇi, vanquisher of foes and unruly demons,
tutob nüpa gyatsö terchen dang
A great treasure of oceanic power, strength and capacity,
yermé palden lamé shyab la dü
And inseparable from him is the glorious guru, to whom I bow!

shyönnu nyi né rik kyi nüpa sé
From a young age, your enlightened potential was awakened,
changchub chöpa yongsu dakpa dang
You practised the entirely pure conduct of the bodhisattvas
tö sam gompé patar sönpa yi
And became superlative in study, reflection and meditation—
tamché khyen ngö lamé shyab la dü
Genuinely omniscient guru, to you I bow down!

ché khé loden jewé yiwang trok
Skilled in teaching, you captivated countless intelligent minds,
tsöpé lokmé rodzin drung né chö
Through debate, you halted the tongues of mistaken dogmatists,
tsompé tubten nyinmor jé khepa
And through composition, skilfully shone light upon Buddha’s teaching—
jangchok tubwang nyipé shyab la dü
Second Lord of Sages for this northern realm, to you I bow!

ten dang dro la tukkyé da mepé
With unparalleled magnanimity toward the teachings and beings,
pong dang lokpé trinlé kha tar dal
You spread the activities of renunciation and study far and wide,
ku sung tuk kyi ten chok shyengpa sok
Commissioned sublime supports of enlightened body, speech and mind,
gyalsé khyuchok chenpö shyab la dü
And more—great leader of the buddha’s heirs, to you I bow!

nyikdü tenpa rinchen nyam mepar
At this time of degeneration when the precious teachings are in decline,
tukkyé dorjé riwo tar tenpé
With your altruistic intention as stable as a vajra mountain,
dorjé chang gi sangwa ngak kyi dzö
You compiled a treasury of the Vajradhara’s secret mantras,1
düpo dorjé dzinpé shyab la dü
Vajra holder, to you I bow down!

naljor wangchuk jetsün birwapé
You illuminated the precious teachings of the aural lineage,
nyengyü tenpa rinchen sal dzé ching
Of the lord of yogis, venerable Virūpa,
sa sum drenda dralwé chö kyi jé
And as a lord of Dharma were without peer in the three worlds—
drenpé dung sel lamé shyab la dü
Guru whose memory banishes distress, to you I bow!

dorjé ku yi kyilkhor nampa shyir
Through the fourfold dissolution of the nectar of profound meaning,
zab dön dütsi drö shyi timpa lé
In the four maṇḍalas of the vajra body,
ku shyi wangchuk palden hé benza
You are the mighty lord of the four kāyas, glorious Hevajra—
jamyang loter wangpö shyab la dü
Jamyang Loter Wangpo, at your feet I bow!

detar tö ching solwa tabpé tü
Through the power of offering praise and prayer like this,
kyé dang kyewar lamé jezung té
May we always be accepted by the guru throughout our lives.
rim nyi lam gyi dröpa tarchin né
May we each the culmination of the path of the two stages,
sangwa sum dang yermé gyurwar shok
And become inseparable from your secret body, speech and mind.

This praise of the omnipresent lord of maṇḍalas was written by the lowest of the master’s disciples,
the dullard Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, who took as an offering upon the crown of his head
the command of the actual embodiment of great non-referential compassion, Tsangsar Choktrul
Rinpoche, when he asked for something suitable for recitation in assemblies. May this
become a cause for anyone with a connection to swiftly receive the blessings of the master’s
wisdom vision in their minds.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2019.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rdo rje 'chang blo gter dbang po la bstod pa/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 2: 701–703
↑ This is a reference to the Compendium of Tantras (rgyud sde kun btus), which Loter Wango compiled.