The Sweet Sound of Perfect Joy
In Praise of the Goddess Sarasvatī
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

hring tsangpé yi kyi semo ni
Hrīṃ! Daughter of the mind of Brahmā
rolpé tso chen lé jungwa
Arisen from the great lake of enjoyment,
da tar karwé shyal nga ma
With your face as pure and white as the moon—
yangchen lhamor chaktsal tö
Goddess Sarasvatī, to you I pay homage!

rikjé sang tsik dzemé ter
Unending treasury of the secret words of the Vedas,
deshyin shek sung chö pung ché
And the vast collection of the buddhas’ Dharma,
chimé lam yang tar khyabjé
Reaching to the end of the path of deathlessness—
yang kyi palmor güpé tö
Glorious Lady of Melodies, to you I bow in devotion!

tambura la khyü jé té
Clasping a ‘tambura’ lute in your hands,
sor tsé dal gyi drengpa yi
And gently playing it with the tips of your fingers.
jikten dé dang ma dé kün
To you who captivate the minds of all, both beyond
yi kyi tenpa trok la dü
And still within this worldly realm, I bow!

ngedön sherab parol chin
In reality you are the Perfection of Wisdom herself,
nampa lhamö zuk su gyur
Yet you appear in the form of a goddess,
ngotsar gyutrul sam mikhyab
A wondrous and inconceivable manifestation,
sa chü wangchuk chenmor dü
Great Lady who has mastered the ten bhūmis, to you I bow!

deshyin shek kün jé chak kyi
To all the buddhas who regard you with their love,
yeshe chen gyi zur da yo
And glance at you with their eyes of wisdom,
nyom juk dechen chötrin tob
You offer great cloud-like gifts of blissful union,
gyé yum chenmor güpé dü
To you, the great mother of joy, respectfully I bow!

loden gang gi drin nying la
As you enter the throats and hearts of the intelligent,
shyukpa dé yi mö nyi du
In that very instant, they become transformed,
mawé wangchuk chenpor gyur
And are made powerful masters of speech—
lodrö chok tsol ma la tö
To you, bestower of supreme intelligence, I offer praise!

detar töpé jinlab kyi
Through the blessings of praising you in this way,
dak yi depé o tso ru
May you enter the milky lake of my devoted mind,
shyuk né khyen nyi yeshe kyi
And grant me the brilliant light of wisdom,
nangwa chenpo tsal du sol
Complete with the twofold knowledge, I pray!
om pitsu pitsu prajna vardhani dzala dzala medhi vardhani dhiri dhiri buddhi vardhani soha
Oṃ picu picu prajñā vardhani jvala jvala medhivardhani dhiri dhiri buddhi vardhani svāhā
Recite this and your intelligence will increase.

In response to the requests of Samten Tulku Rinpoche, the nephew of the noble Palpung Situ Rinpoche,
given together with the gift of a silken scarf, I, Chökyi Lodrö, also known as Jampal
Gawé Gochar, wrote this in the Joyful Grove Delighting the Goddess Sarasvatī in Palpung
Monastery. Siddhirastu!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "lha mo dbyangs can ma la bstod pa rab dga'i dbyangs
snyan/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang,
2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 2: 421–422