The Fulfilment of All Aspirations
In Praise of Noble Tārā
by Candragomin

In the language of India: Ārya-tārā-stotra-praṇidhāna-siddhi
In the Tibetan language: Pakma Drolma la Töpa Mönlam Drubpa (’phags ma sgrol ma la bstod pa
smon lam grub pa)

Homage to the venerable lady Ārya Tārā!

yigé jang ku utpal lé jungwé
Arisen from the green syllable and an utpala,1
kudok jang ku shyal chik chak nyi ma
You are green in colour, with one face and two arms,
chak nyi ku la rinchen dumé tré
Both your arms and your body decorated with jewels—
yidam drolma khyö la chaktsal tö
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.

döndrub lasok rik ngé u gyen ching
Amoghasiddhi and the other buddhas of the five buddhas grace your crown;
chudruk natsö dzumpé shyin dangden
You appear as a sixteen-year-old with smiling countenance,
ziji zö ka dra tsok takpar dul
Your overwhelming majesty forever subduing opponents—
yidam drolma khyö la chaktsal tö
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.

chak yé chöjin chak yön utpal dzin
Your right hand bestows gifts, your left holds an utpala.
natsok pema nyimé kyilkhor la
Upon a multicoloured lotus and sun disc,
yé kyang yön kum tsul gyi rabtu shyuk
You are perfectly poised with right leg extended and left drawn in,
yidam drolma khyö la chaktsal tö
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.2

tukjé chen gyi dro la taktu zik
Constantly you gaze at beings with your eyes of compassion,
ku la jikpa gyé kyob drolma tro
Tārās to protect from the eight fears emanate from your body,
khorwé dukngal künné drol dzepé
And you bring freedom from all the sufferings of saṃsāra—
yidam drolma khyö la chaktsal tö
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.

shyi dang gyé dang wang dang drakpo dang
Pacifying, enriching, magnetizing and wrathful,
natsok lé nam nyurdu drub dzé ching
As well as varied tasks, you rapidly accomplish them all,
trinlé gyatso nyurdu drub dzepé
And you swiftly carry out an ocean of enlightened activity—
yidam drolma khyö la chaktsal tö
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.

sengé langchen mé drul chomkün dang
You who liberate us entirely from all the eight fears—
chakdrok gyatso shazé jikpa gyé
Of lions, elephants, fire, snakes, thieves and robbers,
dedak kün lé yongsu drol dzepé
Enslavement, drowning and flesh-eating demons—
yidam drolma khyö la chaktsal tö
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.

kyewa ngön sak lé dang nyönmong dang
Karma accumulated in past lives, the mental afflictions,
tsammé nga dang mi gé chu lasok
And whatever intolerable harms we have committed,
mi zé dikpé lé nam chigyi pa
Such as the five boundless crimes or ten negative deeds,
dedak tamché malü jangwar shok
Let them all be purified—each and every one!

dak la deté kyewa di lé kyang
And likewise in this very life,
mi ngen té ngen dümin chi dang dra
Let all bad dreams, evil omens, untimely death, enemies
trami shipa tamché jang gyur chik
And every form of inauspiciousness be cleared away,
tsé dang sönam longchö gyepar shok
And let our lifespan, merit and resources all increase.

dak ni ma ong kyewa tamché du
For me, in all my lives to come,
yidam drolma jesu dren gyur né
May I recall the chosen deity Tārā,
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tamché dang
Gain all the supreme and ordinary attainments,
sampa tamché yishyin drub gyur ching
Have all my wishes fulfilled just as I desire,
trinlé malü kün la wanggyur shok
And master every form of activity without exception.

yidam drolma tukjé denpa la
Through whatever merit I have acquired through praising
dak ni rabtu tsönpé dung sem kyi
The chosen deity, compassionate Tārā,
töpa gyipé sönam gang sak dé
With a mind of intense and ardent longing,
jetsün drolma khyé dang mindral shok
May I always be inseparable from you, O venerable Tārā!

This praise of the venerable lady Tārā entitled ‘The Perfect Fulfilment of All Aspirations’
was composed by the great master Candragomin.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.

Version: 1.2-20211129
↑ i.e., a blue lotus flower.↑ This line is omitted in the original Tibetan canonical version.