The Excellent Bilva Tree of Auspiciousness
Praise and Prayer to Terchen Chokgyur Lingpa
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru padmākarāya!

shyi dzok pogyur kündral chöying khar
In the space of dharmadhātu, perfect ground beyond all transition and change,
longchö lhündrub ö ngé tsombu tra
The spontaneous saṃbhogakāya clusters of five-coloured light shine out,
tukjé zer ni gang dul sam mikhyab
And their rays of compassion, taming as necessary, are beyond imagining—
ku sum ngowo terchen lama gyal
Terchen Lama, embodiment of the three kāyas, you reign supreme.

pema jungné pal nam kün gyi chok
Padmasambhava, supreme of all the splendorous,
palden dangpö sangye küntu chang
And the glorious original buddha Universal Holder,
tayé kyilkhor tro dang duwé pal
Splendidly radiating and absorbing infinite maṇḍalas—
palden lamé shyab la solwa deb
O glorious guru, at your feet I pray.

pomé tsultrim ga shyi dri dangden
Fragrant with the discipline of non-emission and fourfold joy,
shyenpen changchub sem kyi tukgyü tam
You possess a wisdom mind replete with altruistic bodhicitta,
nöchü kyilkhor sum gyi ngowor shar
And environment and beings dawn as the essence of the three maṇḍalas—
dorjé dzin gyal khyé la solwa deb
Sovereign of vajra holders, to you I pray.

kater shyung dam chulung bumtrak nyé
Myriad rivers of instruction from the works of kama and terma,
khyé tuk pal gyi bé'ur kyilwa dang
Merged within the glorious arrangement of your wisdom mind,
khé tsün sum gyi yar ngé drayang drok
And you sounded the summer drums of learning, dignity and nobility—1
loden gawa kyé la solwa deb
Insightful provider of joy, to you I pray.

sang sum chalwé nyepé mi dzi tsün
Disciplined, impervious to instability of your secret body, speech or mind,
zangpö trinlé chok kyi tadrur khyab
Your beneficent activity extends even unto the far reaches of space,
khyen tsé nüpé yönten sam lé dé
And your qualities of knowledge, love and power defy the imagination—
terchen lamé shyab la solwa deb
Great treasure-revealing guru, at your feet I pray.

kün dang tünmin kabab rinchen dün
With the seven uncommon, most precious transmissions,2
ngönmé sangdzö zabmö gopar jé
You unlocked a profound secret treasury without precedent,
pemé chok ten salwé drönmé ché
A great torch to illuminate the sublime teachings of Padma—
dam dzin chökyi gyalpor solwa deb
Damdzin, King of Dharma, to you I pray.

drolwa nam shyi trinlé kha dang nyam
Your activity of fourfold liberation is as vast as space itself:
jisi dro di tongwar magyurpa
For as long as beings remain here within this world,
desi namrol trulpa natsok kyi
You continue to display your various emanations—
ten drö dön chen drub la solwa deb
Magnificent benefactor of teachings and beings, to you I pray.

khyepar pemé khebpé shyingkham su
Within the pure realm of Lotus-Covered in particular,
sempa pemé nyugü kur shyeng té
You took the form of the bodhisattva Padme Nyugu ('Budding Lotus'),
gyalsé sempé tsok dang lhenchik tu
Accompanied by hosts of bodhisattva heirs to the victorious ones,
tekchen chö dra drok la solwa deb
And there proclaim the Dharma of the Great Vehicle—to you I pray.

chöpé trin bul diktung tamché shak
I present clouds of offering, confess all my misdeeds and downfalls,
gé la yirang chökhor korwar kul
Rejoice in virtue, and beseech you to turn the Wheel of Dharma.
nya ngen mi da takpar shyuk soldeb
Do not pass into nirvāṇa, but remain forever among us, I implore you.
gé tsok malü drowa yong la ngo
Every accumulated virtue without exception I dedicate to all beings.

dakchak kyé dang tserab tamché du
Throughout all my lives, in all my future rebirths,
terchen lama chok dang mindral shing
May I never be apart from the supreme Terchen Lama.
dompa namdak rim nyi patar chin
May I maintain pure vows and perfect the two stages,
lama ku shyi wangchuk nyur drub shok
And swiftly attain powerful mastery of the guru's four kāyas.

chok ter tenpa dzamling küntu khyab
May the teachings of Chokling Tersar spread throughout the world,
drub nyi jewé norbü zir barwé
And the jewel of billionfold dual attainment sparkle with brilliance,
chok dü nekab küntu tashi shing
So that auspiciousness pervades the whole of space and time,
sishyi getsen yé su khyilwar shok
And signs of positivity in existence and peace spiral rightwards.

Thus, in the actual presence of the great offering stūpa of the Terchen Lama at Tsikey Norbuling,
that unparalleled vajra centre and nucleus of land within the realm of Dokham, Jamyang
Lodrö Gyatso made this prayer on the 17th day of the second month. Siddhir bhavatu. Maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "gter chen mchog gyur gling pa la bstod cing gsol ba
'debs tshul/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang,
2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 3: 259–261
↑ ‘Summer drum’ (dbyar rnga) is a poetic synonym for thunder.↑ i.e., transmissions of canonical
teachings (kama), earth treasures, rediscovered treasures, mind treasures, recollected
teachings, pure visions and the aural lineage.