The White Lotus Garland of Immortality

In Praise of the Supreme Vajra Place, Tso Pema (Lotus Lake)[1]

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti!

May Pema Tötreng, king of awareness-holders,Who embodies the wisdom, strength and loveOf the
victorious ones and their heroic heirs,Grant auspiciousness everywhere and for evermore!


Were a heavenly realm to be transposed to earth,Still it could not compare with this unrivalled
site,This great wisdom lake adorned with lotus flowers —To this supremely sacred place,
I offer praise!

Here the crystal-white peaks of the HimālayasAre beautifully arrayed like threaded pearls,And
some, like fragments of white cloud,Shimmer as if dancing to and fro in the sky.

It is surrounded on all sides by golden hills,And forests thick with white sandalwood,And there
are rocks of precious substance,Bearing signs of enlightened body, speech and mind.

There are groves of plants, flowers, and trees of delicious fruit,As if arisen from requests
to alleviate hunger and thirst;Yet this was not designed or delivered to fulfil such needs;It
naturally provides and fulfils all wishes — and for this, I offer praise!

These divine streams came not from heaven,Nor were they created by the nāga king;It was Padmākara,
achiever of the vajra body,Who miraculously turned heat into moisture.

The flames of the sandalwood pyre, which flickered and raged as if in anger,Fled as if in shame
when he appeared in his deathless body,And this clear, cooling lake, immaculate and purifying,
rare in the three worlds,Appeared as the self-arisen, lotus-filled splendour of the
Lotus Born: emaho!

Single embodiment of all the buddhas' compassion,Lotus King, chief of all sky-faring ḍākas and
ḍākinīs,Miraculously born nirmāṇakāya, untainted by a womb —To this great eternal bearer
of the lotus, I bow down!

With the wisdom consort, deathless Mandāravā,You displayed a hundred modes of illusory passion,And
your fame extended throughout the three planes —To the Immortal Lake-Born Vajra, I
offer reverent praise!

You transformed the kingdom of Zahor to make it pure,And with your unimaginable activity of
taming the unruly,You made it the source of oceans of vidyādhara masters —To the support and
the supported, I offer reverent praise!

May all living beings be cared for by this second Buddha,Be encouraged by the prophecy of a
great secret treasury of uncommon instructions,Become a receptacle of Dharma,And bring infinite
disciples to maturity and liberation!

From Cāmaradvīpa, consider us with compassion:Inspire us, your fortunate followers, with blessings,Cause
the teachings to spread throughout India and Tibet,And pacify the dark forces
that plague us in this troubled age!

On the shores of Tso Pema, I, Chökyi Lodrö, the lowliest of Padma's followers, made this prayer.
Siddhirbhavantu!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey (with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and the kind
assistance of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche), 2018.