The Definitive Ascertainment of Tantra

In Praise of the Great Master Milarepa

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo guru!

Cakrasaṃvara in human form,Lord of yogis, chief of siddhas,Glorious heruka, lord Milarepa,Adorn
my chakra of great bliss.

Your wind-energies dissolved in the avadhūti,The knots in your four chakras were released,And
your lalanā[1] and rasanā were purified,Bound in the indestructible central channel—to you
I bow.

A surge of supreme immutable blissFilled your wisdom channels entirely,And you attained an immaculate
formAnd accomplished the Great Seal—to you I bow.

As each and every form of conceptual thoughtWas consumed by the Rāhu of nonceptuality,[2]You
bound all the dharmas of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa in basic space—To you, the glorious Cakrasaṃvara,
I bow.

In your blossoming youth of untainted bliss,Drunk on the liquor of co-emergent wisdom,You held
the strength of masterful conduct—Great lord of yogins, to you I bow.

You completed the ten bhūmis and five paths,Fully mastered the ten transcendent perfections,Acquired
the ten powers and overcameThe three forms of obscuration—to you I bow.

Manifestation of the four kāyas and five wisdoms,Sovereign of all the infinite maṇḍalas,Glorious
Shepa Dorje—‘Laughing Vajra’,Embodiment of all the Buddhas, to you I bow.

Throughout this and all my lives to come,May I never be separated from Töpa Ga—‘Joyous to Hear’,May
I be cared for by Akṣobhya Vajra,And perfectly accomplish the two types of benefit.


This prayer was made on the master’s anniversary during the Month of Miracles in the Fire Pig
year.[3]

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.

Source:  'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rje mi la ras pa chen por bstod pa rgyud don rnam
nges/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012.
W1KG12986 Vol. 2: 709–710

Reading ma la nA as la la nA. Lalanā is the left channel and rasanā is the right channel of
the subtle body.  ↩In Indian mythology eclipses are caused by Rāhu, 'the Seizer', consuming
the sun and moon.  ↩Milarepa’s anniversary is celebrated on the fourteenth day of the first
Tibetan month, which is known as the Month of Miracles. In 1947, the year of this text's
composition, the anniversary fell on 6 March.  ↩