Thunderous Melody
In Praise of the Omniscient Gorampa Sonam Senge
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

namo guru sarwa dzana punyé sengha yé
Namo guru sarvajñā-punye-siṃhāya

dewar shekpé tenpé dzö dzinpa
Holder of the treasury of the sugatas’ teachings,
yeshe terchen wangchuk gyé den pal
Great mine of wisdom, splendid in eightfold mastery,
mawé sengé nyammé chenpo la
Magnificent and incomparable lion of speech—
rab dang yi kyi güpé töpar gyi
In utmost inspiration and devotion, I praise you!

kalpa gyatsor changchub chöpa yi
Throughout the course of oceanic aeons, you travelled to the distant shore
patar sönpé drib nyi münpa sang
Of enlightened action, dispelled the darkness of the two obscurations,
tokpé yönten özer tong gi dzé
And gained the radiant splendour of the qualities of realization.
jampé pal dang nyisumepa gang
You who are inseparable from Mañjuśrī,
shyönnü dü né yönten tamché dzok
Beginning in your youth, you perfected all the qualities,
khepé drar shyuk chö kyi lü tob gyé
And, entering the ranks of the learned, developed Dharma’s strength.
lung dang rikpé gyenché nampar gek
Captivating with your adornments of scripture and reasoning,
denö sum gyi lekbam pungpo ché
You mastered an abundance of texts from the three collections,
künkhyen kün la wanggyur rabjam pa
And became a scholar of vast learning and universal knowledge.
trogyal miyo gön dang yer miché
Inseparable from Acala, king of the wrathful,
jampé yang kyi chak gi raldri ni
You brandished the sword of Mañjughoṣa,
charwé khaying khyabpé ö kyi kang
Filling the entire expanse of space with light.
gyalwé lung tob kün gé tsenchen gyi
You received the buddhas’ prophecy and became a heart-son
tuk kyi sé gyur ewam trir shyuk shing
Of the one named Kunga,1 and then you sat upon the Evaṃ throne.2
tubten nampar gyalwé chö dra ché
Your great dharma centre of Tubten Namgyal3
ngotsar sum tsen né la cho driwa
Was a wonder to rival the heavenly palace of the three great devas,
khé mang düpa gyatsö yongsu tam
A place where vast crowds of learned scholars thronged.
tubwang nyipé tulshyuk changwa po
Upholder of the discipline of the second Lord of Sages,
sakyé jetsün gongmé shyé shyung nam
When the approach and exegesis of the Sakya patriarchs
natsok lo yi nyokpar gyurpa na
Had become sullied by assorted opinions and assertions,
drung jé chu dang norbu khyé chikpu
You alone functioned as a cleansing jewel to bring purity.
tenpé chö dong sishyi lana to
An offering pillar of the teachings, pre-eminent in existence and peace.
matokpa dang loktok chok tok gi
When your own and others’ sides were unsettled
lo yi trukpar gyurpé rangshyen dé
By incomprehension, misunderstanding and partial knowledge,
khyenrab chö shé norbü lok treng gi
You brought clarity through your gem-like wisdom and analysis,
salwar dzé né yangdak ö nang dal
And the light of genuine understanding shone.
do dang ngak kyi lekshé norbü drom
The jewel-casket of your superb explanations of sūtra and mantra
nyikdü khepa nam kyi nying gi ter
Is a heart treasure of the learned in this degenerate age.
lama jampé yang kyi jesu zung
You were cared for by the guru Mañjughoṣa,
yidam lha yi kyedzok drubpa nyé
And gained accomplishment through generation and completion of the yidam deity.
khandro chökyong pemé tsal du ni
You attracted ḍākinīs and dharmapālas, who gathered like bees in a lotus garden,
bungwa shyindu takpar du shying khor
And became your constant companions.
khepa khepé khyuchok gorampa
Learned—you were supreme among the learned, Gorampa,
tsünpa tsünpé pal gyi ngönpar to
Dignified—you were exalted with the splendour of dignity,
zangpo zangpö trinlé chok gyar pel
Noble—your noble activity spread in a hundred directions—
künkhyen sönam sengér drak la tö
To the one renowned as omniscient Sonam Senge, I offer praise!

dak ni khyé la solwa tabpé tü
Through the force of these, my prayers to you,
jikme lodrö pobpé tsal chen dzok
May I perfect the great strength of intellectual confidence and fearlessness,
zabgyé né la chaktok mepa yi
And may the light of twofold wisdom blaze,
khyen nyi yeshe nangwa bar gyur chik
Unimpeded in realization of the profound and vast!

This garland of praise was written in Sikkim on the twentieth day of the second month of the
Earth Dog year (1958) by Tsuklak Lungrik Nyima, when the thought of this master sprung vividly
to mind, bringing an uncontrollable surge of devotion.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2019.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "kun mkhyen go rams pa bsod nams seng ge la bstod pa/"
in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012.
W1KG12986 Vol. 2: 685–687
↑ i.e., Ngorchen Kunga Zangpo (1382–1456).↑ Ngor Ewam Chöden (ngor e vam chos ldan).↑ i.e.,
Tanak Tubten Namgyal (rta nag thub bstan rnam rgyal), which Gorampa founded in 1473.