Ultimate Praise of the Noble and Venerable Mañjuśrī

by Nāgārjuna

In the language of India: ārya-bhaṭṭārakamañjuśrīparamārthastuti-nāmaIn the language of Tibet:
'phags pa rje btsun 'jam dpal gyi don dam pa'i bstod paIn the English language: Ultimate
Praise of the Noble and Venerable Mañjuśrī

Homage to the youthful Māñjuśrī!

You do not arrive and do not depart;You do not rise and do not remain.You thoroughly transcend
this world.Yours is the domain beyond words.

O protector, how should I praise you?As the world conceives of you,Just so, I too exalt and
honour youIn my devotion for you, O guru.

By your very nature you are unborn,For you there can be no arising.Protector who neither comes
nor goes,To you, the insubstantial, I offer homage and praise.

You are neither real nor unreal.Neither a nullity nor everlasting,Neither constant nor transitory.To
you, the non-dual, I offer homage and praise.

You’re not red or green or crimson;You’re not yellow, white or black.You do not have any colour
at all.To you, the colourless, I offer homage and praise.

You are neither large nor small,Neither heavyset nor slender.Your form is neither tall nor short.To
you, the sizeless, I offer homage and praise.

In your wisdom, you’re not confined to existence;In your compassion, you do not dwell in peace.You
do not remain in either saṃsāra or nirvāṇa.To you, the non-abiding, I offer homage
and praise.

You do not reside in phenomena;Yours is the realization of all things.You are sustained by supreme
profundity.To you, the profound, I offer homage and praise.

Like this, I could exalt you repeatedly.For how else might I offer you praise?In the emptiness
of all phenomenaWho is there to offer praise? To whom?

You have no limits, no centre.To you, the inconceivableBeyond perceiver and perceived,I offer
homage and praise.

This is the expression of the ultimate attributesOf the guru and protector Mañjughoṣa.Through
the merit of this, may this worldCome to resemble the one gone to bliss.

This concludes the Ultimate Praise of the Noble and Venerable Mañjuśrī composed by the great
master Nāgārjuna.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2021.