Verses of Homage to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas Together with their Mantras Arranged for Recitation
by Practitioners of All Levels
by Kyabjé Trulshik Rinpoche

Our Compassionate Teacher, Śākyamuni
nyingjé chenpö tsöden nyikmé shying
With your great compassion, you embraced this turbulent and degenerate world,
zung né mönlam chenpo ngabgya tab
And made five hundred mighty aspirations.
pekar tar ngak tsen tö chir mindok
You are as exalted as the white lotus; whoever hears your name shall never return to saṃsāra—
tönpa tukjé chen la chaktsal lo
Most compassionate teacher, to you I pay homage!
lama tönpa chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye pal gyalwa shakya tubpa
la chaktsal lo
Supreme teacher, bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, glorious conqueror,
Śākyamuni, to you I bow! To you I pay homage!
chö do kyab su chi o
In you I take refuge!
jingyi lab tu sol
Grant your blessings, I pray!
teyata om muné muné maha munayé soha
tadyathā oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā

Glorious Vajrasattva
mintok dorjé tap kyi yeshe ni
You are the primordial awareness of skilful means—the indestructible state beyond all concepts,
mikmé sherab yum gyi ngang du tok
Realized in the nature of the Great Mother, transcendental wisdom free from any reference,
tukjéi chedrak natsok chir yang tön
Displaying your compassion, in all its variety, in every kind of way—
dorjé sempa ché la chak tsal lo
O Great Vajrasattva, to you I pay homage!
om benza sato ah
oṃ vajrasattva āḥ

Amitāyus, Buddha of Limitless Life and Wisdom
jikten drenpé tsowo tsepakmé
Buddha of Infinite Life, foremost guide for beings in this world,
dü min chiwa malü jompé pal
Your glory overcomes all untimely death,
gönmé dukngal gyurpa nam kyi kyab
You are a refuge for those of us who suffer without protection—
sangye tsepakmé la chak tsal lo
To you, Buddha Amitāyus, I pay homage!
om amarani dziwenti ye soha
oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā

Amitābha, Buddha of Limitless Light
dechen shying du chö kyi khorlo kor
In the realm of Sukhāvatī, you turn the wheel of Dharma,
semchen nam la taktu tukjé zik
Gazing on living beings with all your compassion,
damcha jishyin drowé tön dzepa
And acting for their benefit, just as you vowed—
nang ta nyamshyak dze la chak tsal lo
To you, Amitābha resting in meditation, I pay homage!
om amidhewa hrih
oṃ amitābha1 hrīḥ

Buddha Ratnaśikhin
chomdendé deshin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye rinchen tsuktor chen la chak tsal
lo
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Ratnaśikhin, to you I bow! To you I
pay homage!
chö do kyab su chi o
In you I take refuge!
jingyi lab tu sol
Grant your blessings, I pray!
teyata ratné ratné ratna shikhene soha
tadyathā ratna ratna ratnaśikhene svāhā

Blessed Bhaiṣajya Guru, Buddha of Medicine
tukjé kün la nyompé chomdendé
Blessed one, whose compassion for all is equal,
tsen tsam töpé ngendro dukngal sel
Simply hearing your name dispels the suffering of lower realms,
duk sum nesel sangye men gyi la
Buddha of Medicine, you who heal the sickness of the three poisons—
bendurya yi ö la chak tsal lo
Light of Lapis Lazuli, to you I pay homage!
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye men gyi la bendurya ö kyi gyalpo
la chaktsal lo
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Buddha of Medicine, Radiant Light of
Lapis Lazuli King, to you I bow! To you I pay homage!
chö do kyap su chi o
In you I take refuge!
teyata | om bhekandze bhekandze maha bekhandze bhekandze | radza samudgaté soha
tadyathā oṃ bhaiṣajye bhaiṣajye mahābhaiṣajye bhaiṣajyarājasamudgate svāhā

Buddha's Regent, the Protector Maitreya
cham chen mé yi shye dang bü shying sek
The fire of your great love burns up the dry wood of hate,
yeshe ö kyi marik münpa sel
The light of your wisdom dispels the darkness of ignorance,
chö kyi gyaltsap drowé gön gyurpé
Dharma regent, protector of all living beings,
ganden shyukpa de la chak tsal lo
Who dwells in the Tuṣita heaven—to you I pay homage!
om mati mati smriti soha
oṃ mati mati smṛti svāhā

Noble Avalokiteśvara
chak tong korlö gyurpé gyalpo tong
Your thousand arms are the thousand universal monarchs,
chen tong kalpa zangpöi sangye tong
Your thousand eyes the thousand buddhas of this fortunate age,
gang la gang dul dela der tönpé
You who teach each and every one of us according to our needs,
tsünpa chenrezik la chak tsal lo
Lord Avalokiteśvara, to you I pay homage!
om mani pemé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
It is said to be acceptable to add the final syllable hrīḥ.

Noble Lord Mañjuśrī
shejé kha ying zap ching yangpa la
Across the skies of all that can be known, profound and infinite,
lodrö kyilkhor gyepé özer gyi
Shine vast rays of light from the sun of your intelligence,
kye güi marik münpé tsok salwa
Dispelling the darkness of ignorance in all beings' minds—
jetsün jampalyang la chak tsal lo
Lord Mañjughoṣa, to you I pay homage!
om arapatsana dhih
oṃ arapacana dhīḥ

Vajravidāraṇa
gang tuk nyi su mepé yeshe kyi
With the non-dual wisdom of your enlightened mind,
dorjé rinchen kun nas barwé tü
And through the power of your blazing vajra and jewel,
dü shyi top nam nampar jom dzepa
You vanquish completely the forces of the four māras,
dorjé nampar jom la chak tsal tö
Vajravidāraṇa, to you we offer homage and praise!

deshin shekpa tamché kyi
All the buddhas' power and strength
tu top chiktu düpé dak
Is condensed within you alone,
dorjé trowöi kur tönpa
Who manifest as the enlightened form of vajra wrath—
nampar jom la chak tsal lo
Vajravidāraṇa, to you I pay homage!
namash chanda benza krodhaya | hulu hulu | tishtha tishtha | bhendha bhendha | hana hana | amrité
hung pé
namaścaṇḍa vajrakrodhāya | hulu hulu | tiṣṭha tiṣṭha | bhandha bhandha | hana hana | amṛte hūṃ
phaṭ

Noble Vijayā, Goddess of Victory
palden lhamo tönké dawé dok
Glorious goddess, your colour that of the autumn moon,
shyal sum chak gye rab dzé shyiwé ku
With three faces and eight arms, your form ravishing and serene,
yeshe pakyé tsé yi chok tsolma
You grant the supreme gifts of longevity and boundless wisdom—
nampar gyalmé shyap la chak tsal lo
Noble  Vijayā, to you I pay homage!
om amrita ayurdadé soha
oṃ amṛtāyurdade svāhā

Noble Saviouress Tārā
dak gi tserap ngön né druppé lha
Deity on whom I meditated in lives gone by,
dü sum sangye kün gyi trinléma
You are the enlightened activity of all buddhas, past, present, and future,
rap kar shyal chik chak nyi chen dün ma
Brilliant white, with your one face, two hands, and seven eyes,
yum gyur utpala nam la chak tsal lo
Mother of the buddhas, holder of the utpala flower, to you I pay homage!
om taré tuttaré turé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā

Prayer to the Guru, the Embodiment of All the Buddhas
trulpé guru tsen gyé dang
To the eight manifestations of Guru Rinpoche,
druppé rigzin chenpo gyé
The eight great accomplished vidyādharas,
changsem nyewé sé gye dang
The eight great bodhisattvas, the 'close sons',
drupchen kagyé lha tsok la
The eight maṇḍalas of Kagyé with all their deities:
solwa depso chin gyi lop
To you I pray—inspire me with your blessings!
chi nang sangwé barché sol
Dispel all obstacles outer, inner and secret!
sampa yishyin druppa dang
Fulfill all my aspirations!
chok dang tünmong ngödrup tsol
Grant us attainments, ordinary and supreme!
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ

Finally, the Wrathful Union of Hayagrīva, Vajrapāṇi and Garuḍa
chok chüi gyalwa kün gyi ku sung tuk
You are the wisdom body, speech and mind of all the buddhas of the ten directions,
cha khyung gyalpo tamdrin sangwé dak
The kingly Garuḍa, Hayagrīva and the Lord of Secrets
rangshyin chiktu nyer ten trowöi tso
Manifesting as one deity, foremost among the wrathful.
drenpé gek pung jom la chak tsal tö
The very thought of you crushes obstructing forces—and to you I offer homage and praise!
om vajrapani hayagriva garuda hung pé
oṃ vajrapāṇi hayagrīva garuḍa hūṃ phaṭ

Dedication
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through this merit, may I swiftly accomplish the realization
seché gyalwa drup gyur né
Of the buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs
drowa chik kyang malüpa
And may I bring each and every single living being
de yi sa la göpar shok
To that perfect state as well.

changchup sem chok rinpoche
Bodhicitta, precious and sublime:
makyepa nam kyepa dang
May it arise in those in whom it has not arisen;
kyepa nyampa mepa yang
May it never decline where it has arisen;
gong né gong du pelwar shok
May it go on increasing, further and further!

tongnyi tawa rinpoche
The precious view of śūnyatā,
matokpa nam tokpa dang
May it be realized by those who have not realized it;
tokpa nyampa mepa yang
May it never decline where it has been realized;
gong né gong du pelwar shok
May it go on increasing, further and further!

For all of you who have received teachings from me and have a Dharma connection with me, it
would be best to recite all these prayers and mantras every day. Otherwise, recite whichever
you wish, especially on the 8th, 15th and 30th days of the lunar month, and on the four
great anniversaries of our Teacher Śākyamuni. Whenever you do so, the benefit will be immeasurable.
I, the Zhadeupa Ngawang Chökyi Lodrö, an ignorant monk of Śākyamuni, entreat you
with folded hands.
Śubham. Sarva Maṅgalaṃ.

| Rigpa Translations 2011, revised 2016.
↑ It is thought that amidhewa is the Tibetan pronunciation of the Sanskrit Amitābha, just as
bendza is Tibetan pronunciation of the Sanskrit vajra.