Wish-Granting Provision of Twofold Accomplishment

A Praise of Vajrasattva

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ—Vairocana of fivefold certainty, the wisdom of dharmadhātu,Vajra—Aksọbhya, the mirror-like
wisdom,Sa—Glorious Ratnasambhava, the wisdom of equality,Tva—Amitābha, the wisdom of discernment,Āḥ—Amoghasiddhi,
the all-accomplishing wisdom,The embodiment of all five families,
guru Vajrasattva,Lord of all maṇḍalas, all-pervasive master of great bliss,Splendour of
the inseparable union of bliss and emptiness,Vajra sovereign of utterly unchanging coalescence,Vajrasattva,
embodiment of vajra-like immutability,Beyond the ordinary contrivance of
passionate release,With the vajra mind of awakening, beginningless and unending,Supreme,
featureless, all-pervasive and ever-present,Glorious original buddha, primordial protector,Samantabhadra,
magnificent Vajradhara, to you I pay homage.

Great original and indestructible sphere at the time of the ground,Vajrasattva of awareness
and emptiness, vajra-like basic space,Invincible and indestructible, celestial sovereign,
expansive as the sky,Beyond the conceptual elaborations of singularity and plurality,The vajra-like
mind in which the two levels of reality are united.

As the path continuum, form kāya symbol of means and wisdom,Through the generation phase of
unaltered reality just as it is,In which the purified, purifier and fruit of purification
are united,Vajrasattva of consummate appearance and existence dawns.

Free from the taints of mind and the constant motionAnd circulation of channels, winds and essences,The
boundless empty forms[1] of illusory wisdom born of binding in the dhūtiAre naturally
perfect within the great sphere of inner luminosity,And there is nothing to fabricate,
as the naturally arisen, naturally manifest adornmentIs present within the basic space
of wisdom—To this spontaneously perfect Vajrasattva, I pay homage!

As the resultant continuum, the indivisibility of kāyas and wisdomsAre naturally present and
radiate in peaceful and wrathful forms,As the inconceivable vajra expression of the illusory
display,The splendid one who effortlessly accomplishes every aim.

Through the power of compassion, you liberate the cities of existence and quiescence,And your
enlightened activity extends from the realms of the three kāyas to pervade everywhere—Master
of emanation and absorption, Vajrasattva,Glorious chief of the maṇḍala, to you I pay
homage!

Emaho!Your form is coextensive with the very limits of space,Your speech is invincible, unarisen
and unceasing,And your mind is one of exceeding purity—These, your three vajra secrets,
I praise.

May whoever offers you such veneration,Through its virtue attain the levelOf the Guru Vajrasattva
within this very life,And empty the three realms from their very depths!

This praise of the glorious all-pervasive lord, the guru Vajrasattva, was composed by Jamyang
Lodrö Gyatso, in the Grove of the Great Array of Vajrasattva’s Illusory Manifestation, a
golden chamber within the main temple of Katok Dorje Den. Siddhirastu! Maṅgalam!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.